--- LL Courses Week 3 - Content.docx ---
LinkedIn Learning Courses – Week 3
Key Takeaways
Contents
Week 3. Leading Across Cultures / Unconscious Bias2
Leading Globally2
Unconscious Bias2
Unconscious Bias
What is unconscious bias?
Unconscious bias refers to the attitudes or stereotypes that affect our views, our actions, and our decision-making ability. The scientific research in this area demonstrates how unconscious bias is automatically activated and affects how we think day to day. It also impacts hiring and evaluation processes and contributes to the lack of workforce diversity. Everyone is biased.
Why unconscious bias matters to business. Is a small amount of bias really going to dramatically affect your workforce? Yes. Every decision made about a person from the time we're hired to the time we're promoted, passed over, get fired or quit, each decision costs us and the company money. And the wrong decision sends us running to the nearest online employer rating board to post a negative review. A small amount of bias has a large impact on our careers. The effects are dramatic and exponential. Candidates are beginning to make decisions about job offers based on a company's reputation and management of diversity issues. As candidates, we have choices, so to remain competitive, businesses will need to address each aspect of the hiring process from start to finish.
Understanding we’re all biased. According to studies, blonde women on average make 7% more income over their lifetime than women with brown hair, skinny people make more money than overweight people, Tall men are promoted more often than short men, white women are paid more than black women and much more than Latino women. Why does it happen? If someone has an attribute, we find favourable, subconsciously we think that person is good. It's this unconscious need to categorize people that leads to the kinds of decisions that favour some and leave others out in the cold. According to studies in cognitive science, our brains receive 11 million pieces of information every second, and we can only process 40 of those details consciously. This makes us more than 99% unconscious. This lack of awareness means we don't realize just how biased we are. Harvard University's Project Implicit offers a free, online test that measures attitudes and stereotypes. This assessment helps identify areas where we're biased, so we can begin to become more aware of our unconscious thoughts. Our thoughts affect our behaviour, and our behaviour affects everyone around us. By understanding that we're all biased, we can make the decision to work together to be more conscious of our thoughts and actions when relating to others.
The impact of bias. When we're in the workplace, it's natural to seek out colleagues with whom we share something in common. But it's important that we don't allow this familiarity to colour our decision making. Making decisions based on favouritism or a similar background is unconscious bias. When employees see others being promoted based on relationship rather than merit, they leave the company. Employee turnover resulting from unconscious bias is an expensive mistake. So, why not attempt to reengage employees through training? It's far less expensive and better for the morale of the workforce.
Identifying Unconscious Bias
Affinity bias. Affinity bias is the tendency to warm up to people like ourselves. We favour those who have something in common with us. If the person you must write an evaluation of is someone who graduated from your alma mater, you may rate them much higher than the person with whom you have little or no connection. Reducing our unconscious bias as we interact with others at work can be accomplished by creating standard processes that will help you to pause before you react in favour of, or to the detriment of someone in a review process. Working off a structure that you can apply to everyone will help to lessen the influence of bias in your decision-making processes. Standardization also slows down the process so that your automatic and unconscious gut reaction can be replaced with methodical and deliberate action.
Halo bias. The Halo Effect is our tendency to think everything about a person is good because our first impression of them was good. Think about the employee whose first project was a great success, but who hasn't lived up to it since. In fact, this person is coming in late, making a lot of mistakes, and routinely relies on others to get her work done on time. Yet, the manager still rates her highly based on the perception that she's a great employee. If you're a manager, review your own process for evaluating work and put checks and balances in place.
Perception bias. It is the tendency to form stereotypes and assumptions about certain groups that makes it difficult to make an objective judgment about individual members of those groups. According to a study led by researcher Moss-Racusin, there is an assumption that men are better suited to science and technology-related projects than women. So how does this affect women? As an example: when hiring for a web engineer, an SEO analyst, or a data scientist, if eight out of 10 candidates are male, it's difficult to put aside the perception that men do these types of jobs and hire a woman. Our experience has shown us that men work in these roles, not women, so we gravitate towards the perception we're used to. The disparity cannot be addressed until women are perceived as just as capable as men in traditionally male-dominated fields. Tackling the underlying unconscious bias can be achieved by acknowledging the problem exists, ensuring there is widespread awareness of it, resolving to do something about it, and becoming accountable for your actions.
Confirmation bias. Confirmation Bias is described by Harvard Business Review as, seeking out evidence that confirms our initial perceptions, ignoring contrary information. Confirmation bias can make a bad situation worse because we double-down and dig in our heels. We seek out information and evidence that justifies our position or makes us feel like we were right all along. To combat confirmation bias, we need to review the data we have in our possession. All of it. Review the pros and cons to objectively make a decision, based on both sides of the data. Look for data that disproves your point and ask for others to review your conclusions. If you develop a standard system of evaluation for all new products, you'll be better positioned to make the right decision. Confirmation bias is in other aspects of business. Ask yourself: Are there standard systems in place within your company, for employee evaluations? Is your work regularly reviewed, rather than once a year during an annual performance review? Is their consistent data, and reporting, that can be easily used for rewarding positive behaviour? Is there a standard process in place for spending? How are funds allocated to different departments? Are requests evaluated objectively? Without data, we're subject to our gut instinct about people. Which is highly subjective, and unconsciously influenced?
Groupthink. The bandwagon effect, or group think, occurs when individuals try too hard to fit into a group, by agreeing with the majority, or by stifling opinions that may differ from the group. It doesn't even have to occur in large groups. It happens in smaller groups, too, between co-workers, and even among family members. In the 1950s, in a series of psychological experiments, researchers found that people were willing to go as far as giving a wrong answer to conform to the rest of the group. You end up with a pool of people who may have all agreed with an idea, even though those in the room knew that idea was terrible. If you want to positively change the way you make decisions, try one or more of these steps. First take on the role of Devil's Advocate, and let everyone know this is the role you'll be serving in. Next, hear the person with the most authority in the room avoid stating your preferences and/or expectations first. Then reserve a sizable block of time to critically evaluate the options that have been discussed. Finally, invite an impartial third-party to attend the meeting and challenge the opinions of the group. You may not be able to implement each step for every meeting, and you may not want to. However, adding these tips to your toolkit will help you make rational, unbiased decisions.
Diversity, Inclusion and Belonging
What is DIBs?
I'm calling DIBs on diversity, inclusion and belonging. All three are essential, they're necessary, but without the other they're insufficient. Diversity is everything that makes us unique, the seen and the unseen. I'm a mom, I'm a sister. I'm dyslexic, so I have a learning-process challenge, I'll say. I come from a big family, I'm Catholic, I'm this, I'm that. Diversity is all those elements. The inclusion part is the action of creating fairness. Inclusion are our attempts to welcome and acknowledge what makes us diverse and make it a welcoming workplace, a fair workplace, creating opportunity across every moment that matters. That's inclusion but only when you have that sense of belonging in your heart that you are part of a community, that you can be uniquely you, is when you unlock the power of DIBs. And belonging is a human need, it is genetically wired in each one of us. We're compelled to belong, and we're compelled to belong in our unique way. And that compelling need to belong has a light side, meaning unlocking my authentic self and be leaning in and having high engagement.
DIBs and the future of work
When people talk about the future of work, it's actually happening now. The momentum's starting, and the outcome is predictable. By 2055, there will not be a majority race in the US, for example. Millennials and they're seeking for jobs or looking for purpose and they're looking for diversity. We also know that only 3.2% of the Fortune 500 even show diversity numbers, so how does talent today and in the future discover who we are as a diverse workforce? That's a challenge. We've got to equip our managers when to have this conversation and how to do it respectably.
DIBs as the foundation for equitable workplaces
Equity is about fairness, and it's not just about pay. That's the challenge and the opportunity about creating an equitable workforce and an equitable place to work and equity of opportunity. And so, in those decisions that matter from hiring to promoting to coaching to providing feedback, it needs to be fair and equitable. We need to start listening. Your employees will tell you where they feel things are not fair. You yourself can look at pay, you can look at benefits, you can look at the perks and the environment in which people work, and say, is this fair in approach? Do you have guiding principles that make it fair? Or is there a bias that's creeping in there? And if so, fix it. So, you ask some questions, you see some opportunities, and that becomes your roadmap. What I caution everyone not to do, is attack everything at once. If you're worrying about healthy pay and fairness of pay, get that right. Then, look at how you do promotions. Then, look at how you make hiring decisions, and then, look at how you give feedback. Look at how you do job postings. One by one, and over time, you'll make a healthier organization. A common signal in every organization about equity of opportunity, just look at your own promotion rates. Look at the representation. Just pick gender. Gender is usually the first step most companies go for because they can measure globally. If there's disparate representation that was in the bottom to the top, one can assume there's bias.
Leading the DIBs Conversations
Convincing others: Combining facts and emotions
A leadership team might say, "We're doing talent review. "We're looking at promotions. "We're looking at succession planning." All things they normally care about. And then I'll just throw in this little dashboard of diversity. Here's a promotion rate and here's who we're hiring and here's what we look like today. Then I'll say something like, "Ugh!" Like that or not too pretty or "Hm, there's some opportunity here." And then I'll keep going. And if you're working with a high performing team, they won't like that response. "What do you mean, it's not pretty? "What do you mean, there's a problem?" I'm like "Well, there's bias obviously in these numbers. And they'll say, "Well, what do we do? "What's the problem? "How can you fix it?" My whole intent is to get some agitation, uncomfortable, lot of uncomfortable dialog." And all of a sudden, it becomes self-aware.
Use storytelling to back up the facts
The best tool in our arsenal to drive change is a great story. People remember how you make them feel, not necessarily what you said, and through a storyteller, through someone that tells a personal story from beginning, middle, and end, we release chemicals in our brain. We start to have compassion and empathy for the other human being. We put ourselves in their shoes for a moment in time, and say, "What if that were me?" And it's a teaching tool because you can tell the moral of the story is don't go in the woods, you're going to get eaten or blank. When you tell a story for work, what it does is let someone into you about who you are as a human being, how you were raised, when things worked or didn't work.
Greg Walton is a professor at Stanford and he did a study and has been doing a study now for well over a dozen years about uncertainty. And uncertainty happens when you move, when you go to college, when you get married, when you become a parent, like these are big uncertainty moments. Every human being goes through this big arc, and he was looking at studies about people with lower economic opportunity, people of color coming into a dominant white affluent university, huge uncertainty just going into that university, and then not knowing your own path. Like will I fit in, will I thrive? And so these students, he would discover, would try to mask. When you're even a majority in the room, you're masking 20 to 25% of your time in your brain. You are adopting language, you are adopting your clothing, you're adopting your use cases to fit in to be heard. If you are a minority or in fear, you might mask anywhere from 50, 80% or 100% if you fear for your life. You will never tell your company that you are gay if it is illegal to be gay, so you make up a whole other life every day. So, if I can tell stories about how I came out at work or how so and so navigated something and showed their journey, then people like that will say there's an opportunity for me to be great. I can be successful.
Reinforce the story using other leaders
As a leader, the vulnerability is to show your own journey. If you can tell your own story of discovery, then you become the role model for others and they open up to you and they become more vulnerable, and there's this beautiful gift of humanity that happens and the trust improves. I can look at your LinkedIn profile and find out what you did, but I don't know why you did what you did. I don't know your struggles, I don't know the opportunities, I don't know what made you go from A to C, and by telling the story, one, you allow others to envision their possible paths, which is a great gift, but if you think about the moments when you learn the most, it's not when things are perfect. If you have a leader tell those moments when they didn't belong, the biggest challenges, their mistakes, who helped them and how. Those stories, inevitably, unlock opportunity in someone else's brain. And if they're authentic, if they're real, they're humble, and they're personal, that's a huge gift. The leader also becomes more reflective about those moments where they made their mistakes and they become more compassionate to their employees, as well. And so storytelling from a leader's perspective, getting them to open up creates part of the foundation for culture change. It gives permission to be more vulnerable. It shows people opportunities for career pathing and should increase engagement of an organization.
How to hire diverse talent
You'll have a leader going, "Well, "my gender balance isn't there," or "I don't have enough international". "But I want the best talent. "Get me the best talent," and then they default on what they're used to having as the best talent because it's comfortable. And there is a success pattern. If you always hired someone from company X with a degree of Y and then you're actually de-risking failure, you're not ensuring success. I know at a minimum what they're capable of doing. Therefore, they're going to survive, maybe thrive. But if you turn the knob a little bit as a recruiter and say, "Look, I get that pattern, "but you already made that choice. "You've already hired three of those. "If we hired different shades of this "or a new pottery maker, "what would that do, the debate at your team? "How would that show up in making us a better? So, teaching a recruiter how to have that conversation will change the dynamic with the manager. Then talk about how you do inclusive interviewing. Make sure that you have a diverse panel that's interviewing this candidate because everybody's looking for a diverse company. 67 percent of millennials say they will only work for diverse companies. So now when they come in you got to make sure the panel reflects that uniqueness that you offer at the company. And then you got to teach the manager how to reduce bias when you're making that final call because, again, they're indexing on reducing risk of failure because they have a tight timeline. A recruiter is a coach. They have amazing opportunity and power to help evolve dibs in any organization.
Engage and retain diverse talent
You can recruit great, amazing talent into the door with all their diversity, and if they don't see themselves being successful, surviving and thriving in the organization, that sense of accomplishment and future growth will diminish the time that they spend with you. So, it's what Professor Greg Walton talks about in uncertainty in his research that if I walk in, I don't see signals of others like me being successful and thriving, then I'm already one foot out your door. It's just a matter of time. And the best way to retain that talent is to have high engagement. And the way to do that is increase belonging. If I have a high sense of belonging, even a moderate sense of belonging with my team, that I matter, that you care for me, then my performance, goes up 56%. That's huge to a business. It also correlates my intent to stay increases by 50%, so now turnover gets reduced, performance increases through belonging. Your journey with me should last many cycles before you move on to something else that's even more amazing, so I shouldn't fixate on the job that you do today. I should fixate on the talent and the amazing things you bring to bear. That's when you get engagement. That's when you get that sense of belonging, and that's when turnover decreases.
DIBs for Managers: Tools and Strategies
How to listen to your employees
Listening is so much harder than talking. I must be present. I must learn, I must be aware, I must listen. If you're going to listen, then really listen, please. Put down the device, close the laptop. Seek to understand. Process what you're hearing. Echo back what you thought you heard. Calibrate. And once you truly understand what they're saying, then you can move on to how you're interpreting it, not before. And what is amazing, how often we want to be heard, we want to say our piece without actually listening to the other. I need to listen to understand. I need to listen to figure out, are we aligned or not aligned? I need to listen to make sure that if there's white space, a problem, an opportunity, that I have enough awareness in how to fix that opportunity. An active part of learning is listening. Then you have to tell your audience what you did with what you heard. And when you close that loop, this is what you said, this is the interpretation, and this is what I did, you build trust. You build a better organization, and you give them permission to speak up more, and you're role modelling the right thing.
Integrate DIBS into the employee experience
The reason why I fixate on the emotions and the opportunity is because the thing I call belonging gets threaded throughout everything. It's not a destination, it's a journey. It's personal; it ebbs and flows; and over time, with different proof points, it gets stronger and richer.
Embedding DIBs in your company culture
The first step to looking at DIBs in your company is just take a pulse. How is your company doing? What does the culture feel like, look like? Listen to your employees, do an EBS survey. Then look at the health metrics, turn over your diversity footprint, where you're growing, how you're growing, the makeup in your management team, so on and so forth. And then you'll see some glaring opportunities and then you have to decide how to prioritize them and how they get addressed. And so, if you're hiring but can't retain, it's a culture thing and if it's a culture thing, think about belonging. Think about where it impacts every moment of an employee's journey and then survey those moments, survey at hire, how was your greeting, how was your day one, how was your ramp-up, do you feel supported? That first transition as a manager, did you feel supported, do you feel like there's someone cares about you? Those DIB index-like questions along the way and then calibrate. Find where you're trending, fix it and you're going to find lots of opportunities, but don't try to fix them all at once. You'll be overwhelmed. Focus, one step at a time and the journey really creates trust. The journey is the object, not an end result, because employees just want to know that you care, that you want to create a health, healthy-like vibe, where you're respected, that I can be authentically me, and do my best work. When DIBs is an initiative in a training course, you've already lost. It's got to be in how you walk the hallway, it's got to be in how you make your decisions, it's got to be in how you sell the company, and evolve as a company because without DIBs you stagnate. So, with DIBs you can fly faster and further.
Role modelling
Role models for DIBs. It is a responsibility across the organization to try to get this right and around the world. Thinking about DIBs in India is different than how DIBs will manifest in Singapore or Japan in recognizing their culture and how they listen. Getting on the journey is fascinating, but if you try to make one-size-fits-all on DIBs, you also will fail. Your role models have to be diverse in nature. They have to be around the world. They have to be from top to tail in your organization. Hopefully your CEO's doing some of this work with you. Even if it's only on gender, even if they pick one sliver of what is a diverse world, that helps tell the story and model something. And then pick some other senior executives, be it an LGBTQ, be it an introvert, be it a mom, be it a dad, returning from parental leave. How does that manifest in an organization? We need role models. We need to see what works and what doesn't. I learned from my mistakes but I can teach others through my mistakes. So it's how you welcome someone. It is being there when you're needed. It is asking for differences of opinion, giving permission to play devil's advocate. Give me an opposing point of view. Model that so as a leader if you're not turning on your own video, even if you're on your iPhone, let them see you. People want to connect. So I think those are the things you can do in everyday moments that thread across the organization and create momentum. And I think it's asking the question, How are you, how was your weekend? And then shut up and listen.
Diversity and Inclusion in a Global Enterprise
The business case for diversity
Many of the best companies in the world struggle with diversity and inclusion. But if we approach diversity and inclusion just like any other organizational initiative, it can be accomplished. Diversity increases companies’ ability to capture new markets. Having people on your staff who understand the target market will make you 70% more likely to appeal to those customers. Second, increasing diversity increases sales. When you have a better understanding of your customer base, you're better able to reach your customers. What does this mean on a global scale? The McKinsey Global Institute estimates that a scenario in which women achieved complete gender parity could increase global output by more than 25%. And third, diversity enhances innovation. Having diversity of thought not only helps you reach new markets and increase sales, but it helps you improve your business by being more innovative. Diverse perspectives bring new ways of thinking.
What is diversity and inclusion?
The diversity part means increasing the number of underrepresented groups in your organization.. If you're trying to increase the representation of a group like women, you can do this in two ways. You can increase the number of women you hire and you can decrease the number women who are exiting your organization. Also, diversity doesn't mean that you have an employee base where all the IT folks are men, and all the HR folks are women. Diversity is not when you have all male professors and female staff. You need integration to get diversity a thought.
Inclusion means that people of all backgrounds feel they can contribute to the organization as their authentic selves. It involves two main components. First, people need to feel that they belong, they fit in. How? You involve them in decision-making, you challenge them, you invite them to engage with you socially. The second component is uniqueness. This means that not only do you allow people to belong, that you also allow them to be their unique, authentic selves. You recognize they have differences and you respect, and embrace those differences, rather than asking them to assimilate to some specific culture. If individuals don't feel like they contribute or they feel like they just need to assimilate, they're much more likely to quit your organization because it feels awful not to belong, and it's exhausting not to be yourself. Inclusion is key for the success of diversity. Diversity is getting the right people in the door, and inclusion is welcoming them, allowing them to be themselves, and as a result, keeping them there.
Diversity and inclusion efforts
Let's talk about diversity efforts. The easiest sell for a company, is to increase the breadth of recruiting efforts to get a more diverse talent pool. If you look at your applicant data, and you don't have a diverse population of applicants, you might be able to move the needle, just by recruiting more broadly. By bringing in a more diverse talent pool, you're reaching the best talent. The second thing that companies commonly do, is look for ways to reduce bias in the selection process. Our biases are strong, and it's difficult to overcome them. So, one way to remove the potential for bias, is to remove identifying information from the resumes altogether. You can also reduce bias by having specific criteria laid out before you review applicant's resumes or interviews.
Diversity and inclusion interventions
There are many ways that companies can increase inclusion efforts. Many companies offer mentoring and coaching programs to help create an equal playing field for women and minorities. For example, German industrial manufacturing firm Siemens offers a program called women and their path within the company. It uses training, mentoring, and coaching to help women attain leadership roles. Programs like this can increase retention of talented women. Having some women in top leadership in the organization is a signal to other women that there is the opportunity for advancement. Another way to increase inclusion is to remove one of the major institutional biases that make it difficult for women to compete in the workforce. Family responsibility. Companies make work life programs such as having flexible work time or compressed work weeks part of their talent strategy. They offer emergency in home daycare for dependents and tuition assistance to promote work-life balance. These efforts allow women to bring their full selves to work. But they're also useful to retracting and retaining millennials who tend to want greater workplace flexibility. Most companies also have some type of Employer Resource Groups or affinity groups. They might be focused on LGBTQ, women, ethnic minority groups, or even parents. Other companies have diversity councils. The purpose of all is to offer social support by helping similar individuals connect with each other. They might offer a connection between the ERG and top leadership, a way to get voices heard, or even access to special mentoring or training programs. One idea is using a diverse and interdisciplinary, or cross functional task force to solve an organizational issue. Although the focus is not on diversity per say, they really do bring together diverse people and enhance inclusion. E.g.: Medtronic, one of the world’s largest medical device companies, has a program called culture circles. Teams work to solve an organizational issue, and then they meet for a big competition on the best ideas. Attendees are super engaged.
Establish accountability
One of the most important things you can do to make a diversity and inclusion program successful is to have accountability. You need to set objectives, measure your progress, and hold people accountable to reaching diversity goals. One obvious way is the diversity among new hires. That's good, but there's other ways of doing it. Diversity in promotion rates, engagement rates among diverse talent, or leading an ERG. Turnover is another great metric for the success of diversity and inclusion programs. But if you have high turnover rates among your diverse talent, you can guess there's something wrong there. There might be a pay disparity or low levels of inclusion.
Global Diversity and Inclusion Strategy
Create a global diversity strategy
As you begin to form your global diversity strategy, let's share some of the steps that some of the top companies follow.
You need to figure out the why behind your diversity strategy. Your company needs to determine why you care about diversity. Each company needs to figure this out for themselves, but SHRM, the Society for Human Resource Management, has identified four reasons that companies care about diversity. One is fairness, basically the moral argument. Two is compliance with the law. Three is dealing with talent shortages. And four is mirroring the customer base. In other words, having people who are more similar to your customers will help you attract and serve them more effectively.
Determine who is included in your diversity strategy.
Decide how, how you're going to do it. Finally, you get to the how, which reflects the steps you will take to implement your strategy and achieve your goals. In the case of GLEE at PwC, because their goal is to create inclusiveness for LGBTQ employees, they're taking several steps. One, provide a supportive environment for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered partners, staff, and allies, to network and develop professionally. Two, promote an inclusive, diverse, and respectful work environment. Three, position PwC Canada as the distinctive firm and employer of choice for the LGBTQ community. And four, identify business development opportunities in the community at large. Then they measured key indicators of success on these metrics. For example, you can measure the number of women throughout the organization, changes in turnover rates for different groups, or engagement levels across the organization.
Uncover the reasons for diversity
Why does your company care about diversity? And based on that answer, what does diversity mean to you? It might look really different depending on what country you're talking about. You want the reasons for diversity from your global diversity strategy to align with the reasons you promote diversity in your home country. So, the first reason is the moral or fairness argument for diversity. The moral argument focuses on creating equality for groups that have been historically disadvantaged. Depending on what country you're in, these groups are going to be really different. The second reason for diversity is compliance with legal requirements. Clearly, legal requirements are going to shift depending on what country you conduct business in. If you're doing diversity to comply with the law, it's going to look really different no matter where you are. For example, in the US, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act prohibits discrimination against employees over the age of 40. In most of Europe the equivalent law prohibits discrimination against persons over 50. Also in the US, using quotas as a way of increasing the hiring of women and minorities is illegal. In contrast, many European countries use quotas to increase the number of women on corporate boards or in specific industries, or in government. The third reason for diversity is talent shortages. In some countries, talent shortages may not be a problem. In others, the shortage of workers is going to be immense. ManpowerGroup finds that talent shortages are at their highest in the last decade. In the US, 40% of companies report difficulties in finding qualified talent to fill jobs. In Japan, this number is about 80%, but in China it's closer to 20%. If the primary driver of your diversity initiatives is a lack of talent, that argument might not make sense in some countries. The fourth reason is to mirror the customer base to improve your ability to reach those customers. Again, you need to consider the customers you're serving in each area. The final reason is having diversity of thought, and this would ring true anywhere. When people have different perspectives, they're able to mitigate groupthink and come up with creative, innovative, and even more accurate solutions.
A local or global diversity strategy
The management diversity across countries requires that you understand how different countries conceptualize diversity. You have to know how the social, legal, and political environment of a country might change the way diversity and inclusion efforts need to be implemented in that country. The parent company should allow each local business to define fund and implement their own diversity and inclusion initiatives in their own way. The, how you, as a company, are going to manage diversity across countries. If you're Royal Dutch Shell, you're not just placing one office in the U.S. and one office in the U.K., but you also have individuals from these different offices working together on globally dispersed but inter dependent teams. In this case, you may want to adopt more of a global approach. You want people in the different offices to be treated the same. So, their approach was to have business leaders from a diverse set of regions come together and decide what practices make sense for Shell global. Then all regions agreed to adopt 80% of the practices that they had decided upon. This still gives a global feel, but allows some flexibility by country.
Create a localized strategy
Top companies say, "you're going to need to make your diversity strategy local, not just global." What's the best way to do this? Establish a local diversity council. The council will have a good understanding of local culture and practices. And they can provide recommendations for how your company should adopt your strategy for your given region. The local diversity council may point out how the recruiting strategy will need to change, or the selection metrics, even the goals themselves may have to adapt to the local culture.
Global HR Practices
How to use benchmarks
What is measured matters, so you need to measure diversity. But first you must figure out what your targets are. But to set targets, you need to have some meaningful benchmarks. First, you could look at the population you're drawing from. For example, in the US, 50% of the population is women. Two, you could benchmark against college degrees. But what percentage of graduating engineers are women? That's 20%. So maybe you want to use that number. Third, you could examine industry averages and aim for more. Only 11% of practicing engineers are women. Fourth, you could look at what the leaders in your industry are doing. Facebook's latest batch of engineer new hires was 27% women. But does using these numbers make sense if you're in Japan or Oman? No. In Japan, only 5% of engineers are women. And in Oman, 53% of engineers are women. You need to do the benchmarking in a culturally relevant pool. You need to use goals and data when it comes to diversity if you want it to work. But to do so, you need some meaningful benchmarks.
Recruitment and selection
There are points in the HR process where you can enhance diversity. And it really starts at the top, with recruiting and selecting as you begin your search for talent. When it comes to recruitment, you need to cast a wider net to get a diverse slate of candidates. You can do this by looking at how you post job announcements. Data show that recruitment ads can be written in a way that is more or less appealing to women versus men. Beyond that, you can just be sure that your job ad doesn't actively discriminate against one group or another. The next step is to go out and actively recruit talent from underrepresented groups. Recruit from colleges that have more diverse students. Maybe you look to related industries or reach out and share job postings with women and minorities on LinkedIn. Also, go beyond your network. If you think about networks, most people in your network will look just like you and have your same background. We always tell our friends when a job opens in our company. So, reach out beyond your friends to get the word out about a job that's open in your company. As far as selection, the big step in selecting for diversity is to remove bias. Unconscious bias has profound effects on the selection of women and minorities, and just removing that will result in a greater number of women and minorities. Essentially, you should remove identifying information from the applications so you can hire in a bias-free way. Beyond that, it's important that you have diverse slates, meaning that you consider more than one woman or minority for a job. You need to interview two. Third, quantify what you're looking for in a candidate, and then measure your candidates against those job skills, rather than making global judgements where bias is most likely to creep in.
Add inclusion to the organization
You need to have a culture of inclusion within your organization. But what exactly is inclusion? People need to feel they can belong but also they need to believe their uniqueness is valued if they're going to feel included. Be sure that all of your talent feels included and able to contribute fully to your organization by giving them challenging work assignments and ensuring they contribute to conversations. This means that you need to engage in leadership behaviours that make it safe for all people to share their thoughts. Tell people, we want to hear from you. Show them by being supportive when they contribute or asking them to share their thoughts. You can also increase inclusion through mentoring and employee resource groups. Employee resource groups also called infinity groups, can help enhance inclusion by providing a social network and additional opportunities for non-majority group members.
Training
There's many different customs and cultural nuances when you travel internationally. You need to learn them, and the data show that training is key. So, what kind of training should you include? Expatriate cultural training is one of the most essential steps to ensuring that overseas assignments are successful. Managers need to learn the customs and cultural elements of a given country if they're going to successfully lead people in that country. Also use unconscious bias training to make people aware of the biases they might have against people in this new culture..
Approaches to Diversity
The cultural landscape
The largest study ever done on the international workforce is called 'The GLOBE Study'. In stands for global leadership, and organizational behaviour effectiveness. GLOBE. It was started in 1991 by Bob House at Wharton Business School. The study involved 17,300 middle managers from 951 organizations in 25 different cultures. Based on this study, there's 10 major cultures in the world. Just in Europe there's four. There's Latin Europe, which is Spain and France, Germanic Europe, Germany and Netherlands, Nordic Europe, Denmark and Sweden, and Eastern Europe, Greece and Russia. The U.S. is part of the Anglo culture, which includes Canada, Australia and the U.K. All of Mexico, Central and South America comprise Latin America. Asia is divided into Confucian Asia, like Taiwan and China, and Southern Asia, which includes India and Thailand. There's Sub Saharan Africa, which includes Nigeria and Zambia. Finally, there's the Middle East, which includes Turkey and Egypt.
An emerging market is a country that's not quite at the standards of a developed market but offers great promise for business, because it has intermediate levels of income, fast economic growth, and increased institutional development. The major emerging markets in the world right now are Brazil, Russia, India, and China ('BRIC'). It's useful to learn about them and consider partnering with these global forces.
Brazil
When it comes to gender, Brazil, along with Argentina, Mexico, and Chile, rank at the bottom of women's access to equal pay and leadership equality. There are really positive projections for gender parity in Latin America, with women expected to hold nearly half of all professional and managerial roles by 2025, although they've typically lagged behind Western Europe and North America. Race is a much more difficult issue. Black Latin Americans comprise a disproportionate number of those in poverty, and there's strong biases there, with job ads in Brazil will even refer to skin colour on applications or request photos from applicants. Attitudes towards LGBTQ employees are improving greatly in the region, but a court ruling in 2017 allowed for conversion therapy for gay and bisexual individuals. Allowing that practice, which was outlawed back in 1999, raised questions about the attitudes toward the LGBT community. What should companies in Brazil do to enhance diversity and inclusion? Well, according to Diversity, Inc., companies in South America with formal recruitment policies had 20% more women. To some extent, companies in Brazil just need to get women in the door and need to avoid biased language in recruitment. Companies in Brazil should also invest in women's leadership programs. Companies with leadership programs for women had four times more women in management than other companies in Brazil. Because of historical biases against women, programs that break down barriers and provide women with access to leadership training would be helpful at reaching parity in leadership. Another idea for companies in Brazil is to have a global diversity council. Companies in Central and South America with a global diversity council were twice as likely to offer domestic partner benefits, and with the issues around gay rights in Brazil, this could be helpful at creating equality. There's still a lot of work to be done in Brazil, but equality, at least around gender, is increasing.
Russia
One of the major emerging economies in the BRIC is Russia which I will consider part of Eastern Europe. SHURM, The Society for Human Resource Management, places Russia in the bottom 10 countries for global diversity readiness, which reflects a balance of social, political, legal, and inclusion metrics. So, let's discuss their treatment of women, minorities, and LGBTQ employees. Then I'll offer a couple of pieces of practical advice about working in Russia. Starting with gender, there's strong gender imbalances in Russia. Women have a 30% wage gap and are very underrepresented in politics. There are also laws prohibiting women from working in rough industries like driving trains, fishing, or front-line firefighting. However, women have very high levels of educational attainment and comprise two fifths of senior management. So, I think what we are seeing is a cultural shift in gender equality. In terms of minorities, there's been a large influx of immigrants to Russia over the last decade. And this seems to have resulted in some level of xenophobia among locals. We also don't see very strong support for LGBTQ rights in Russia. In 2013 a law was passed that outlawed any speech that supports homosexuality in front of children. Despite those numbers, the Russian economy is growing and companies like Philip Morris International have made great strides in their diversity and inclusion in Russia. They have 40% women in managerial roles, and they attribute this to efforts like Flexitime and remote working. For their remote working program, they allow all employees to work one day a week away from the office. And they offer sabbatical leave of up to a year for all employees. So, like much of Europe, flexibility programs could increase the success of women in the workforce in Russia. Companies in Russia may also consider formal diversity recruitment programs, which have had great success in countries like Italy and Belgium. Russia is one of the four most difficult cultures for ex-patriots, but it's on the strategic growth plans for many US companies like Pepsi Co, P&G, GM, and GE. So, one of the important things that companies can do for employees moving to Russia is to engage in high levels of cultural training and provide employee assistance programs to help employees with that transition. Finally given what we know about bias in Russia it's important that companies publicly state their non-discrimination and non-harassment policies. So that employees know the expectations for working in that company. For example, Coca Cola provides a long list of groups that are protected. Age, disability, sex, sexual orientation, family status, race, religion, and full-time status. And they prohibit discrimination, or harassment based on these characteristics. And carefully outline reporting procedures if someone violates these rules. Russia offers a lot of opportunity for future business and it's exciting that diversity and inclusion can be part of that future.
India
To suggest that Asia is a single place is pretty absurd. 60% of the world’s 4.3 billion people live in Asia. In fact, just China and India make up 37% of the world's population, so it's no surprise that these are two of the major emerging markets. Let's start with India. In general, people across Asia believe that diversity will happen passively and direct effort around diversity isn't needed, and this is true in India. In Asia, only half of companies even have formal diversity policies. India has really lagged on gender diversity in the workplace, and generally there are immense levels of inequality between men and women in society. Women still need their husband's permission to work. Looking at some statistics for diversity in India, there are only 5% of women on corporate boards in India, but India's Companies Act of 2013 required public companies to have at least one woman on their board, and that's actually caused an increase in the percent of women on corporate boards. A KPMG survey said that there's really not been enough effort around diversity in India, and they suggest that, quote, "In order to achieve greater diversity, "there needs to be change of mind sets, "voluntary diversity targets, "alignment between board composition and strategy, "and looking beyond personal networks "for director appointments." When it comes to sexual orientation, India also lags, but in 2017, the Supreme Court guaranteed freedom of privacy when it comes to sexual orientation. Persons with disabilities are also not given equal treatment in India and are relatively excluded from the work force. So, what works when it comes to diversity in India? In India, companies with formal diversity recruitment policies have one third more women than other companies. Leadership and mentoring programs have an even greater impact in these areas. In companies across Asia, leadership programs focused on women nearly doubled the number of women in leadership. But a Catalyst study showed that programs like this are practically non-existent for women in India. We can see that mentoring has a substantial impact on women in India, resulting in five times more women managers and twice the number of women executives, so adding more leadership and mentoring programs targeted towards women would be a great idea. There is a lot of work to be done around equality in India, but we hope that it will be achieved.
China
Diversity in China is difficult because of the belief that diversity should happen naturally, but there's really more to it. Within Asia, we can talk about East Asia like China where there are strong collectivist values. This makes the topic of diversity quite difficult because one's personal network, or guanxi, is very important. Don't judge my pronunciation. The idea of going outside one's network to increase diversity might be met with objection. In fact, nepotism, which in the US is viewed negatively, is a cultural expectation in China. It would be amoral not to hire someone from you family if he or she needed a job. So, what's the reality of diversity issues in China? The greatest efforts in China and most of Asia are increasing gender diversity. China's among the most successful countries in Asia at achieving gender diversity, with more than half of the work force being women and nearly 36% of senior managers. China still lacks women on corporate boards. In terms of race, there's really very little focus on increasing ethnic diversity in China, where the population's largely homogenous around race. LGBTQ rights are also not great in Asia, and Beijing, China was rated the least welcoming city in the world for gays. So, what works when it comes to diversity in China? Formal recruitment policies work well, but in fact, only half of companies currently have them. China might also consider more leadership programs, which have nearly doubled the number of women in leadership across Asia. There is great opportunity for businesses to grow in China, and their diversity and inclusion programs may evolve with that growth.

--- LL Courses Week 4 - Content.docx ---
LinkedIn Learning Courses – Week 4
Key Takeaways
Contents
Week 4. Managing and Leading Developers2
Agile software development. Creating an agile culture2
Tech career skills: moving from developer to engineering manager2
Week 4. Managing and Leading Developers
Agile software development. Creating an agile culture
Why culture matters
What does it mean to be agile? It is about being nimble and responsive, agile teams focus on being adaptable and resilient. How do you build that dynamic into your organization? Culture. Culture is the collection of all the shared values, beliefs, priorities, and behavioural norms that help individuals within a group navigate different situations and solve problems. Culture is a shared experience that's developed through shared learning. The important practices won't stick, and you won't achieve your real goal of being nimble and responsive if you don't address the underlying culture of your organization. If we're going to enable our teams to be truly responsive in the face of change, we need to address our cultural DNA. Culture, even though it can be squishy and invisible and sometimes hard to define, it has one of the biggest impacts on whether organizations are truly agile.
The importance of psychological safety
The most important trait that a team needs to thrive is psychological safety. And that is the ability for team members to take risks without feeling insecure or embarrassed. Things that you can start implementing today to help make your team more psychologically safe: 1. Be accessible and approachable. Get personally involved on your team and show that you care. 2. Admit when you don't know something. No one knows everything. Demonstrate the limits of your knowledge with genuine humility. 3. Share your mistakes and challenges, because failure is inevitable if you're taking a risk. Model risk-taking by sharing your own fallibility. 4. Invite participation. Get other people involved and show that you really value their input. 5. Highlight failures as learning opportunities. Punishing people for trying something new or taking a risk that just didn't turn out as planned? That sends the message that it's better to never try anything new. 6. Use direct language. Straightforward and actionable language helps enable learning. 7. Set boundaries. Be clear about what is acceptable behaviour, and what is not. 8. Hold people accountable. When someone crosses a boundary or doesn't meet an expectation, or fails to perform, it's important to hold them accountable fairly and consistently. Psychological safety is one of the most important factors of an agile culture. When individuals feel safe to speak up and experiment, the entire team thrives, and is better positioned to be nimbler and more responsive to the inevitable changes that will come its way.
Build trust
Research shows that trust is the driver of cooperation. And it becomes critical when environments are uncertain. Now, when you adopt agile, you're embracing and acknowledging that uncertainty is just inherent. So, how do you go about building trust? Trust is built slowly, over time and through lots of small interactions. In her book, "Dare to Lead", Dr. Brune Brown details seven elements of building trust that emerged from her research, which you can remember by the acronym, BRAVING. These elements are habits that you can work on individually, but also focus on cultivating as a team. Boundaries. It's important to understand what other people value. Know what's okay and what's not okay. And, be able to say no. Reliability. This is about keeping promises, as well as being honest of your own limitations. Accountability. When mistakes happen, take ownership, apologize and make amends. Vault. This one is about being sensitive about experiences that aren't yours to share. Integrity. Talk is cheap. Putting your values into action matters. Non-judgment. The ability to discuss how we feel, what we need and where we need help without judgment is important. Generosity. Instead of immediately criticizing or blaming someone else, use the most generous interpretation possible towards their intentions, words, and actions. By working on the factors that build trust, you're on your way to laying the groundwork for a strong agile culture.
Mission, vision, and values
Crystal clear statements that outline goals and expected behaviour are an important framework for an agile culture. When a mission statement, vision statement, and a set of five to seven core values are used throughout your daily work, you can empower your team, provide greater ownership over decision making, and then give your team more of that autonomy that they're craving. Some tips to help you write your own mission, vision, and core values. First, be short and specific. Next is to create statements that are unique to you and your situation. Finally, use concrete, strong, inspirational action words.
Agile anti-patterns and anti-dotes
Shame versus empathy
If you're looking to implement an effective agile culture, then getting good at rooting out all that shame and blame becomes an important part of the work. Shame is the fear of being disconnected and feeling unworthy of belonging. Shame can eat away at the foundation of your culture. But it happens behind the scenes, and then it manifests itself in unhealthy team behaviours like back-channelling, discrimination, coverups, perfectionism, and more. Blame is another way that shame manifests. And here's how it works. When we feel the intense pain of shame, we create an emotional discharge through blame, because we don't want to feel that feeling. And these concepts of shame and blame are deeply ingrained in developer culture, even down to the tooling. There's an incredibly powerful antidote to shame: empathy. - Empathy is a perspective-taking practice. And to do that, Dr. Brown shares five skills to focus on honing. The first is to learn to see the world as others see it. And to do this, you get curious about people's perspectives. And honour it as the truth, even when that truth is different from yours. Second is to learn the be nonjudgmental, which, for some of us, can be hard. We tend to judge in areas where we feel the most shame. Next is to understand another person's feelings and then also communicate your understanding of those feelings. Build up emotional literacy. And that way, you can discuss the nuances of a wide range of emotions. And finally, honing your ability to be curious, pay attention, and notice details through mindfulness.
Heroes versus teams
Building a team based on hero culture can have a lot of unintended side effects. Daniel Kimble is the CEO of Residence Executive Coaching, over the years, has observed six reasons why a hero culture should be kept in check. First, being a hero is addictive. While we want to reward team members for doing good work, hailing only heroes can cause people to crave that adoration above anything else. It might not seem like a big deal, but this can compromise overall product quality, because there's a lot of glory in swooping in to save the day rather than solving those underlying problems and preventing those from happening in the first place. Next, not everyone can be a hero because, if everyone is a hero, then no one is. When only a few people get the lion's share of the attention and all the rewards, then other people feel like they can't measure up to impossible standard. Third, heroes hide deeper problems. Heroes mask inefficient processes. Instead of rewarding heroes, spend time thinking about why heroes need to exist in the first place. Fourth, heroes inevitably create burnout. And that's because there's often an immense amount of personal sacrifice that's required to be a hero, you end up spending all this time with late nights and insane hours. You put work ahead of your family and your own well-being and all of that comes at a cost. In the short term, you're going to lose productivity because of fatigue and in the long term, you risk complete burnout. Fifth, heroes spawn information hoarding and turf building. Once you're a hero, you don't want to lose your coveted status so there's a motive to hide information and protect your turf. Lastly, heroes disempower, and they don't scale. There's little to no incentive for heroes to spend time leveling up the skills on the rest of the team. And often, heroism leads to jealousy, infighting, and just a toxic culture where you lose out in the long run. What should you do instead? There are several principles that point to the benefit of cross-functional, self-organizing teams that work at a sustainable pace. In an agile culture, the emphasis moves from glorying one or two individuals to celebrating success as a team. Individuals bring their strengths and passions to the group and work together as a team to deliver working, quality software quickly and with excellence.
Stress versus calm
Stress can be good, particularly for achieving short-term goals. But when it comes to executive functioning and making good strategic decisions stress can be detrimental. Chronic stress can even lead to burnout. Instead, we want to work smarter in ways that keep our prefrontal cortex, which is the part of the brain that's in charge of executive functioning, engaged so that we can work effectively and minimize reactiveness. Two principles in particular: 1. Build projects around motivated individuals. Give them the environment and the support that they need and trust them to get the job done. One of the leading causes of stress at work comes from what's called task-related stress. And this is being told to do something but then not really having the autonomy or the resources to do it. We can alleviate this task-related stress on our teams by encouraging people to listen to each other, giving them the resources they need and then empowering them to experiment and find solutions together. This mindset of continuous improvement is the mark of a really healthy agile team. 2. Agile processes promote sustainable development. The sponsors, developers, and users should be able to maintain a constant pace indefinitely.
Failure versus experimentation
In an agile culture, we don't see failure as the end goal. We see it as an unexpected result that we can learn from. We use experimentation and continuous improvement to help us adapt and then course correct as necessary. With this mindset, failure through unexpected outcomes helps us grow and it makes our systems and our teams stronger through emergent design. In an article published in the Harvard Business Review, Julian Birkinshaw and Martine Haas outlined a three-step process for using failure as an asset. First, learn from every failure. Regular reflection is an important practice to evaluate where you can be better. Rather than just feeling depleted by failure, embrace it, as a learning opportunity, and adapt. Next, share your lessons. Your learning doesn't stop with you or your team. Create a communication infrastructure for sharing your learning across your entire organization. Finally, review your pattern of failure. Gather data and look for how your approach is working.
Efficiency versus responsiveness
Companies need to shift from being efficient to being responsive = agile.
Silos versus collaboration
Silos, great for farms, not so great for Agile teams. The short-term gains are lost to the long-term burdens. To get good at breaking down silos, focus on collaboration, Heidi Gardners' research shows that the more that organizations collaborate, and specifically those that are knowledge-based, the greater their bottom-line results in both revenue and profit. Collaborative organizations also have higher customer retention rates, are more innovative, manage risk better, and enjoy higher employee productivity and loyalty. So, while individuals can focus on being more collaborative in their day-to-day work, there are also many systemic issues that must be addressed to make collaboration part of the culture. And these include restructuring performance metrics and compensation, paying attention to how information flows throughout an organization, and in general, a communication pattern that resembles a network, rather than a traditional hierarchy, or a hub-and-spoke model. Those are going to have greater levels of collaboration. Reviewing terminology and taxonomies used to organize system, and then refreshing them when they become outdated, and investing in the resources, technologies, and tools that encourage collaboration.
Building your team
Play to strengths
When you start to organize your team in a way that everyone can play to their strengths, you've got the beginnings of a high functioning environment. When work doesn't align with our natural skills, abilities, and passions, we end up not contributing to our highest potential, and that means that the entire team can suffer. But when we're intentional about aligning our work to our passions and our purpose, it can feel like pure magic. Individuals are more empowered and resilient. It's also easier to develop the traits required for psychological safety, such as compassion, open communication and respect. There are many different tools to help you assess the strengths of your team. And two popular ones include CliftonStrengths and VIA Character Strengths.
Diversity, inclusion, and belonging
When we start to assemble our teams, it can be so tempting to bring on people whose personalities and strengths are just like our own. Organizations that invest in building teams that have diverse backgrounds, perspectives, and ideas are more likely to benefit from positive outcomes. However, teams also have to think about ways to create culture. It is inclusive and provides every single individual with a sense of psychological safety and belonging. Psychological safety is to ensure that everyone has the same access to opportunities and that everyone's ideas are heard and respected. Belonging is the ability to bring your whole self to work, and to operate from a place of authenticity. Successful, agile teams incorporate all three aspects. Diversity, inclusion, and belonging to their team building efforts. They also recognize the power of cross-functional teams, and embrace a wide range of skills, perspectives, and backgrounds.
Support success
When we think about what makes a successful agile team, we need to consider a few different things. We need to think about interpersonal relationships, and we also need to think about the organizational systems in which those relationships exist. There are two tools to help us make sure that the structure of our teams is arranged so that we can maximize effectiveness within that complex system, Conway's Law and symmathesy:
Conway's Law focuses on communication within an organization and describes how the design of our work product is dependent on the communication structures that we use to develop them. "Organizations which design systems are constrained "to produce designs which are copies "of the communication structures of those organizations." So, if you want your work product to be flexible, modular, and easy to work with, you first have to pay attention to how your team communicates. Communication structures that are focused on hierarchy create rigid work products that are brittle and difficult to change, and that's not what we want within a software system. Communication structures that resemble networks lead to software systems or other work products that are more resilient, modular, and easier to change.
Symmathesy. This is a term that was developed by Nora Bateson, and it describes mutual learning that occurs within a system. In this context, a system isn't distilled just into the parts that comprise a greater whole, but instead the system emerges, and it develops because of the complex interactions within it. The team includes the people we work with, and the software itself. The software is part of the symmathesy. We learn from it, from its error messages "and logs and the data that's collected. "And it learns from us, because we change it," end quote. Recognizing the systemic and complex interplays that occur to develop software can help you develop the organizational infrastructure that your team needs to thrive.
Enable flow
Have you ever had an experience where you were so engrossed in your work that it felt like you were just becoming one with the work? Time flies and you just feel incredibly engaged and you've got this amazing sense of accomplishment to the point where you almost find yourself in a trance, and it just feels like pure joy. It is what researcher Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi describes as flow. How you motivate yourself and others has a huge impact on how easy it is to get to that flow state. Flow is best attained when individuals are motivated from within rather than from external sources. In his book "Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us", author Daniel Pink describe. three elements that have to exist for intrinsic motivation. 1. Autonomy. Individuals need to feel like they have a sense of control over their work, and Pink subdivides this into four critical areas: tasks, time, technique, and team. Now the foundations of Agile are really built around the idea of autonomy. We've got self-organizing teams and trust baked into its principles. 2. Mastery, which Pink defines as the desire to get better at something that matters. Ins Agile team, we have concepts like continuous improvement and technical excellence, and all of that contributes to mastery. 3. Purpose. The most deeply motivated people, most productive and satisfied, hitch their desires to a cause larger than themselves. Teams that can articulate that larger vision and then connect the context that an individual's work has in getting those goals accomplished, they enjoy more intrinsic motivation and therefore more flow.
The nine dimensions of flow as outlined by Csikszentmihalyi: Does your team have a presence of clear goals, availability of immediate feedback, a match of challenges with adequate personal skills, the merging of action and awareness, focused attention and concentration on the task at hand, perception of control over the situation, a loss of self-consciousness, absorption so intense that it alters the sense of time, and intrinsic motivation and autonomous initiative. When you optimize for flow and intrinsic motivation, you're well on your way to creating an Agile culture.
Regular reflection
Setting aside time for teams to regularly reflect is an important part of agile culture. Retrospectives are powerful tools, and they help teams learn and grow together. Psychological safety is critical for reflection, because we need to be able to talk about all of those things that may not have been so great. People need to be able to speak their mind, be vulnerable, and take emotional risks. You won't be able to uncover root causes unless you've built trust, and a culture of openness and honesty. In their book "Agile Retrospectives: Making "Good Teams Great," Diana Larsen and Esther Derby provide a variety of exercises to help teams set the stage for their reflection. How often should you reflect? What does that regular interval look like? Well, each team is going to develop their own cadence.
Empowering Individuals
Candor and conflict
Part of building an agile culture is creating an environment where people can be candid, disagree and debate. The goal is to lead from a place where you both care personally and challenge directly.. All of that trust and that psychological safety is the foundation for us to have these open and honest, and often really difficult conversations. Agile is not about hiding our feelings and opinions so that we project this appearance of all getting along. It's about getting to the heart of what is hard so that we can continuously improve. And in this sense, healthy conflict is an important aspect of a strong, agile culture.
Growth mindset
Caron Dweck's research shows that a growth mindset, which she defines as, "the belief that your basic qualities "are things you that you cultivate through your efforts," is strongly correlated to positive outcomes in school, sports, business, relationships, and many other contexts. The opposite of a growth mindset is the fixed mindset, which Dweck defines as, "believing that your qualities are carved in stone." Research shows that people who have this fixed mindset, they use unsavoury tactics, kind of as a coping mechanism. They blame people, they shirk responsibility, they tend to be micromanagers or work too hard. The world of software is dynamic and ever-changing, and there will always be these mental obstacles that we have to overcome. When we adopt a growth mindset, we can persevere and learn and improve.
Some suggestions for fostering a growth mindset on your team. First, teach your team about the growth mindset, and help them yet each other. When you hear someone use fixed mindset phrases, remind them that they are smart, and they are capable. They might not understand how to get through something right now, but you know that with enough dedication, they can figure it out. Next, root out obstacles and roadblocks to learning by asking people what they need to be successful. How can I support you is an incredibly powerful question. Third, praise and reward the effort and learning that you observe. Studies show that this keeps people motivated to keep going, even when the times get tough. Fourth, encourage people with strong business skills to join mob sessions or take courses about coding.
Embrace negotiation
Negotiation is a constant process on an Agile team. Competing priorities often require people to debate differing points of view and then agree on the best path forward. Negotiation is a necessary part of working on an Agile team because unlike command and control structures, the team doesn't just take orders from above. Rather, they collaborate and discover together how to best achieve their goals. Agreement without this negotiation is called groupthink, and that's a marker of a dysfunctional team that can have profound negative outcomes. So, when teams get good at negotiating, they can respond to change, navigate challenges, and then agree on next steps with more speed and less effort. If you want to become a more effective negotiator, here are some tips. First, become crystal clear on what you want. Wheeler describes this as a reckoning of your needs, priorities, and trade-offs, as well as your fallback options if negotiation becomes stalemated. You'll also want to get smart on who you're negotiating with. What are their needs and challenges and desires? Building empathy. Develop situational awareness. Learn to observe changes, and then think about how you might react. Embrace improvisation as a successful part of negotiation. Build trust and forward momentum through small agreements. And finally, be careful not to push too far. Keep the endgame in mind and learn to balance short-term setbacks with long-term gains.
Clear and compassionate communication
While communication is a critical component of a project's success, there are definitely some challenges when communicating on a software project. First, software is, for the most part, an intangible project. It tends to be more abstract, and that means it's more prone to misunderstanding. Second, there are a variety of different skills required to build software, from big picture business skills, to atomic commits from the people who write the code, and this means that sometimes people with different experiences struggle to understand each other. Finally, semantics. Semantics refers to the meaning of the words and symbols we use. Getting everyone semantically aligned is one of the biggest challenges that I've encountered when it comes to communicating on a software team. Here are some suggestions on how you can focus on improving your communication. Get curious and learn about clear communication. And make improving your communication skills an ongoing practice. Slow down, take deep breaths, be mindful. Practice your listening skills as much as your presenting skills, because both are important. Use methodologies and practices that help create a shared understanding. Work together, find ways to collaborate and communicate regularly. Develop software as a group through practices such as mob programming. Ask questions when you don't understand something. And be patient, and kind, when you're asked to explain.
Tech career skills: moving from developer to engineering manager
Moving to management
Many people think of management skills and people skills as something inborn rather than something you can learn. Don't worry. Management skills are indeed skills and they're ones you can learn. In this course, we'll learn more about what skills you can develop to start out strong in management. This course aims to give you the tools you need to transition from a technical sole contributor to managing people in tech.
What do managers do?
As a manager, you might find yourself tasked with taking often abstract goals and vision from your executive teams and then breaking these down into actually actionable goals, which you can then work towards with your team. You're also going to be taking feedback and information from your team back up to your own manager and back up to those executive teams as you advocate for your team. You're going to need to check in with them regularly. Speaking to your team as a whole and with members of your team one on one will be part of most managers' experience. These meetings can also be leveraged to help work with your reports to manage their work life balance. As part of advocating for your team, you're going to need to work with other people both in and outside your company to make sure your team members have the tools, the support and the information they need to do great work. You'll also be meeting regularly with your own managers and perhaps meeting with project leads, maybe clients and loads of other stakeholders. For each member of your team to grow professionally they're going to need those clear, actionable goals to shoot for. Coaching them around these goals is going to be part of your day to day job. To let them know how they're doing relative to these goals, you're going to want to give them clear and effective feedback as often as you can. Part of this feedback cycle will include rewards or maybe you can reward their hard work with a promotion or maybe a raise. Given enough time working as a manager, a review-related task that most managers will eventually have to face is giving references for one of your team members when they're ready to move on to a new role, either within your company or somewhere else out in the industry.
Skills and attributes you need as a manager
As a manager, you're going to be sort of generally responsible for the work that's assigned to your team, check in on the status of tasks assigned and help make sure that they're being done. You'll also be responsible for making sure the work assigned to your team is reasonable, that it's well-scoped, and really, that it's possible for your team to accomplish. This is part of your larger duty to your team and to your reports to help them balance the demands of their work with their personal lives (work/life balance). It helps your team members and the team have satisfying, sustainable lives outside of their jobs. If your teams are well-rested, they're going to be more resistant to burnout, and research piece after research piece has tied employee satisfaction with their home lives to better creativity, lower turnover, and other exciting, great business outcomes. Your team members are going to develop professionally as you manage them. As their manager, one of the most rewarding responsibilities you'll have is to guide them through their professional development. Helping you report set, clear career goals and guiding them along the path of these goals is going to be a large part of your work with each individual. Their long-term career goals may eventually take them outside of your team or even your company, but you've got to be ready to support them no matter how much you wish they would stay. One of the largest is working to balance the fiduciary and contractual obligations to a company when they might conflict with the ethical duties we have to the individuals we manage. As a manager, you're going to have to decide for yourself where to draw those ethical lines.
Holding one-on-one meetings
One-to-one meetings are regular discussions with one of your team members at a time that you're going to hold in a room conducive to confidential discussion. One-to-ones are more than just status updates. They're a great way to learn about the stress levels on your team or the health of your team. And they're an important part of your toolkit to build trusted relationships. To conduct a meaningful one-to-one, you can prepare by creating an agenda beforehand and taking notes during the one-to-one. Keep in mind, you're unlikely to forget, but your team members are people, with lives outside of work. Taking an interest in their whole selves is something many great managers do. They took notes, unobtrusively as they talked, to follow up on some of these points later. Good managers help their team members maintain good work-life balance. Having these in-person conversations allow managers to spot potential problems early. If you're managing remote teams, try to meet regularly via video calls with both of you in a quiet room, conducive to private conversation.
Agendas, note taking, and documentation
Keeping detailed notes helps you create a record that you can use as guidance to work out why things have gone wrong or hey, why things are going right. These records you keep can also be used as evidence that your report needs to be rewarded when they're going above and beyond. Structuring your notetaking around agendas for meetings like one to ones can help keep meetings moving along as intended as well as provide a framework to track notes and issues. There may be action items for you coming out of one to ones with each employee. Make sure that you're keeping track of things in an easy-to-access way. Taking these notes in a shared doc can let both you and your team members add context during and after your meetings, but as a manager you may also want to keep a copy of your notes that you don't share with your team members. These notes could include anonymous feedback, observations about the feedback you've shared, and notes on any sour review or disciplinary processes.
Reviews and assessments
Review time is going to be a busy time for you as a new manager. Reviews are regular assessment periods where the performance of an employee is examined. The outcomes of reviews can impact bonuses, pay, promotion and the professional status of people on your team. The notes you've been taking will be a valuable asset to you in review time. Reviews are designed to help assess your team's performance. Equip them for success in reviews by clearly communicating the standards to which they'll be judged. Set clear goals with your team and then let me demonstrate evidence of their success in reviews. Make sure you check back regularly on their progress. And help coach them towards success. Take these reviews seriously. They may have serious impacts for each person on your team. You want to be sure that their pay and benefits are competitive and fair. Clearly document each team members current work level and the progress they've made since the last review period. Interleaving direct quotes of feedback from co-workers and clients in review documentation can help you clearly evidence the value each person brings.
Letting go of the keyboard
Shifting your mindset from coding to coaching
As a manager, you have the potential to have a much bigger impact on your products and your projects than you would as a single contributor. But this often comes at the cost of having to step back from working on development or design as part of your daily tasks. You're going to be keeping track of your team and your progress towards shared goals. You likely won't be able to scale your attention to cover all of your management tasks and intensive hands-on technical work, you're going to need to step away from the keyboard to delegate. It can be tempting to just do it yourself when you have the technical skills to solve a problem, but letting your team learn and build these skills themselves will help make sure that your team can do great work, even when you're not there to be hands-on. Activities like pair programming can be a great route to sample letting go and to practice supporting your team members in their professional development. As a manager with a technical background, you'll still sometimes be called upon to help out in hands-on ways, but by doing this in thoughtful, conscious ways, you can help ensure that you're teaching your team to work self-sufficiently.
Approach technical problems as a manager
When you were a sole contributor, you were responsible for your technical contributions to the team. But as a manager, you're going to be called upon to help deliver solutions to technical problems that are larger and more complex than a single person could hope to solve. To begin a group effort for these large or complex technical challenges, you're going to first need to work with your team to scope this problem down and break it into manageable chunks. Then look around at your team, at their skills, and the interests of your team members to help make good decisions on who to assign these different segments of work. Make sure that you're delegating tasks not only on a team member's ability to do the work but also on their learning goals and their interests, and as equally throughout the team as possible. Now the best thing you can do to address this technical problem is to monitor progress and offer focused support. Keep score and cheer your team on while making sure they have the resources and the autonomy they need to make good decisions. When your team is stuck on a technical approach to a problem that just isn't working or maybe they're otherwise deadlocked, it's time for you to shift mindsets from acting as their coach. Ask direct questions about the project's direction. Use information from your 1:1s and project status reports to decide if this current approach to your technical problem is worth continuing.
Managing junior developers
Working with junior talent often requires a high level of contact with your junior team members, especially if this is their first time working in a technical role. It's especially important that you book regular one-to-one time with your more junior employees. Don’t spend too much time focusing on the negative challenges the junior developer encounters, better move on to ask focused questions about the work being done and about what they learned. Highlight positive things about their work and suggested further opportunities for development. Also, make sure you're checking in with your junior developers outside of formal one-to-ones and meetings. Pair with them or partner on working projects when you can, and source opportunities for them to work with their peers of different skill levels. One of the main goals in onboarding and upskilling junior developers is to help them develop the skills and the confidence they need to contribute to the team. Make sure they also getting time to work independently. Be sure they're learning the problem solving and the technical skills you want them to bring to the team and to the future careers. Be sure that they're getting the chance to work on a varied range of exciting projects. Don't just give them the easy work.
Managing senior developers
How can you help guide and support someone who knows more than you do? Much of the work you do with very experienced talent on your team is going to be around goal setting, coaching and supporting them. This is going to feel a lot like managing your junior and your mid-level team members. Don’t bluff and don’t pretend technical knowledge you don't have. You can source other senior team members for technical review help, and make sure this high-level knowledge is being shared throughout the team. Skill sharing helps you build resilience into your team. It benefits you as a manager as well as providing rewarding new experiences for your more junior talent. Your senior talent can also benefit from exchanges like these. Experience mentoring, pairing with and supporting junior talent will let them learn skills that help them grow into different senior roles in the future.
Assess tech skills outside your expertise
You'll eventually get the chance to manage someone whose technical skillset just doesn't overlap with yours. This can be an exciting chance to learn about technical topics outside your understanding, but it can provide unique challenges for a manager. Managers don't need to be able to do the job of every team member, but you should have enough understanding of their work to describe their role and describe most of their daily tasks. If you don't have a good grasp of their working capabilities, you're not going to be able to effectively support them. If their technical skills are far enough outside your own skillset, you must learn their field. You’re managing them and you're working closely with them, which, should hopefully provide you opportunities to talk to them and to learn. Where possible, ask someone else in an appropriate level to help review the work outside your skillset. Be aware that sourcing review from the team member's peers or people they manage may be challenging in some workplace cultures. In preparing for reviews on work that's outside your technical skillset, look back at your notes and at the output of their work. Did they usually deliver on what they promised? If not, why not?
Cross-team collaboration
We've already learned a lot about how managers work to facilitate communication between themselves and their teams. Managers also play a valuable role in enabling work between teams in and outside of their organizations. E.g.:  how teams work with the executive and strategic teams within their organization. You'll be given goals and requirements from the levels above you, and then you'll bring these to your team. In healthy workplace cultures, you should also be able to take the needs and concerns of your team through feedback back up to leadership to help shape how you work together. Collaborating with leadership teams can involve a lot of workplace politics. You may also be called upon to facilitate work between your team and other teams internally. For this, you're going to understand how the internal politics of working with these other teams will impact your work. When you're collaborating with internal teams, you can often count on there being a great deal of alignment in shared goals. It is an effective way to share information without dragging all the members of both your teams into meeting after meeting. The collaboration pattern that many managers find the most challenging is when you're going to need to facilitate work between your team and external stakeholders. Relationships of these types will often be defined through contracts or other legal structures. The shared goals of collaboration with these internal teams are often defined through these processes. This can be challenging because you have less institutional insight into the priorities of external teams. Not being able to tell their level of commitment or the resources they've allocated to shared efforts, can lead to mismatched expectations.
Managers as advocates
Mentoring as an engineering manager
Mentorship is the formal or the informal practice of supporting another person through their personal or their professional development. Team members can be mentored by their manager, their peers or almost everyone. Mentorship can add value to your team in many ways. Mentorship between your team members can help build bonds of trust that contribute to healthy working relationships. Team members who are receiving mentorship, they gain new skills as they benefit from the experience of their mentors. Mentors can develop soft skills and people management skills that will benefit their day to day work with their peers. Both mentors and mentees will benefit from the exchange by getting additional perspectives and approaches to their work. You may want to look at ways that you can set up structured mentoring relationships. Would assigning a more senior member to a new team member fit how your team works? And how would you recognize and reward mentorship in reviews?
Advocating for your direct reports
One of the most impactful things you can do for the people you manage is to advocate for them. Advocacy for the members of your team could be around the conditions of their work, such as overtime, pay, or promotions. Or it may also centre around better access to resources, access to information, or agency for your team to do great things. It is campaigning for them to get what they deserve but in the good way. You’ll need to clearly understand both their current status and performance in your company as well as your company's culture. You can advocate for your employees both when their performance warrants a reward, but also when their performance suggests they need some extra support to succeed. For employees performing well, this could mean showing evidence of this performance to leadership with requests for a higher salary or for bonuses, a more flexible schedule, or other perks. As a manager, you have a larger amount of power and influence than most sole contributors will. It's your responsibility to use this additional power and to advocate for your team.
Ethical considerations in management
Some of the ethical requirements you'll face as a manager we formalized, perhaps is written guidance for your company, or even as laws. Other ethical boundaries in your work will be made up of highly personal judgments based on your values. Ethical challenges that are less formalized or unwritten can be much more challenging for managers to navigate, especially for new managers. While there may be shared ethical standards in the workplace, they can often be difficult to sort out as a new manager. A good example might be to think about how you'd like to react if the needs of your business or your project began to directly conflict with the best interest of a team member (e.g.: if a work project began requiring regular unpaid overtime from members of your tea).  Think critically about ethical questions like these before they arise. This will leave you best able to act in ways you're willing to live with. If you speak to your own manager about the way similar situations have been handled in the past, this can give you a good benchmark for company culture and ethics. But you shouldn't use this in lieu of your own good judgment. Sharing your own thoughts on different ethical aspects of your work is a fantastic way to help take your own ethical framework and make it part of the wider company culture. As a manager, you have a unique opportunity to help steer your team and your workplace towards more ethical, more equitable modes of working.
Having difficult conversations
Discussions about difficulties between team members, poor performance or even crises such as harassment may be part of your life as a manager. Before you go into a difficult conversation, first, make sure you've gathered all the relevant information about the issue. Take your notes into your conversation, so you'll have all the facts to hand. It can be tempting to minimize or avoid difficult conversations, especially when you have friendly relationships to maintain. But as a manager, it's important and it's fair to address difficult issues early and directly. To keep from minimizing or softening the discussion, you may want to structure your notes as an outline for the conversation. Speak to your team member in a quiet, confidential space. Clearly outline the issue, the changes or the corrections that should be made, and what next steps they can expect. If there are consequences from this issue, discuss what outcomes are possible. It's natural for people to become defensive during difficult conversations. Give your team member appropriate time and space to respond, but don't let the conversation get side-tracked. If appropriate, have the team member sign or document their understanding of the information you've shared. For serious issues, you may also want to follow up on your in-person conversation with an email or other document outlining the issue. Share further information about the issue if ongoing outcomes or follow up are involved. If this is a performance or an interpersonal issue that requires additional follow up, you'll need to continue to closely monitor the situation. Be willing to continue to document and to intervene as needed.
Growing Management and technical skills
Maintain and expand your technical skills
Moving from a technical role into a role as a manager could lead you to a lot less hands-on technical work, which with enough time, can make it difficult to keep your tech skills sharp. But while you're building your new management skills, there are also approaches you can take to keep your tech skills up to date. Sit down, and list all of the management, all of the business, and all of the technical skills that you want to develop, or you want to maintain in the next year. Making a list of everything you want to learn and then carefully prioritizing your most important learnings can keep things from getting overwhelming. Then, make time for learning opportunities. As a manager, you're going to need to prioritize the learning and development for your team members over your own. By setting clear goals and logging the work you're putting into learning experiences, you can help get the most out of the time that you do have. Learning materials be books, technical podcast, in-person conference or a meetup, or any number of social tech experiences.
Growing your management skills
A single course can't possibly give you all the skills you'll need as a manager. You continue to deepen your technical knowledge throughout your career, you'll want to keep building these management skills. There's a host of resources out there. Setting clear goals for your own professional development can help you stay on track while also logging your learning. Pairing your goals with a learning journal can help you keep the same kind of documentation you keep as a manager, but for your own professional development. Think critically. What would make serving your team easier? What skills gaps do you see in your work with them? What kinds of feedback could you source from your team or your own manager to help you drive your future learning? Trust yourself.
Setting goals with your team
One of the biggest benefits to being a manager is that you and your team are going to be able to accomplish much more than you were able to accomplish as an individual. But to make progress towards these bigger wins, you're going to need to work with your team to set and track good goals. The goals you work towards with your team and teammates will sometimes be handed down from higher up in the business and sometimes be developed within your team. Large or big picture goals will be best achieved by breaking these down into smaller, more manageable milestones that will lead to your big win. These smaller goals have the benefit of being easier to track. Make sure that as you're setting goals, these goals are measurable. Your team members should be encouraged to set individual goals. These goals are a great place to have them articulate their learning and professional development needs.

--- LL Courses Week 5 - Content.docx ---
LinkedIn Learning Courses – Week 4
Key Takeaways
Contents
Week 4. Managing and Leading Developers2
Agile software development. Creating an agile culture2
Tech career skills: moving from developer to engineering manager2
Week 4. Managing and Leading Developers
Agile software development. Creating an agile culture
Why culture matters
What does it mean to be agile? It is about being nimble and responsive, agile teams focus on being adaptable and resilient. How do you build that dynamic into your organization? Culture. Culture is the collection of all the shared values, beliefs, priorities, and behavioural norms that help individuals within a group navigate different situations and solve problems. Culture is a shared experience that's developed through shared learning. The important practices won't stick, and you won't achieve your real goal of being nimble and responsive if you don't address the underlying culture of your organization. If we're going to enable our teams to be truly responsive in the face of change, we need to address our cultural DNA. Culture, even though it can be squishy and invisible and sometimes hard to define, it has one of the biggest impacts on whether organizations are truly agile.
The importance of psychological safety
The most important trait that a team needs to thrive is psychological safety. And that is the ability for team members to take risks without feeling insecure or embarrassed. Things that you can start implementing today to help make your team more psychologically safe: 1. Be accessible and approachable. Get personally involved on your team and show that you care. 2. Admit when you don't know something. No one knows everything. Demonstrate the limits of your knowledge with genuine humility. 3. Share your mistakes and challenges, because failure is inevitable if you're taking a risk. Model risk-taking by sharing your own fallibility. 4. Invite participation. Get other people involved and show that you really value their input. 5. Highlight failures as learning opportunities. Punishing people for trying something new or taking a risk that just didn't turn out as planned? That sends the message that it's better to never try anything new. 6. Use direct language. Straightforward and actionable language helps enable learning. 7. Set boundaries. Be clear about what is acceptable behaviour, and what is not. 8. Hold people accountable. When someone crosses a boundary or doesn't meet an expectation, or fails to perform, it's important to hold them accountable fairly and consistently. Psychological safety is one of the most important factors of an agile culture. When individuals feel safe to speak up and experiment, the entire team thrives, and is better positioned to be nimbler and more responsive to the inevitable changes that will come its way.
Build trust
Research shows that trust is the driver of cooperation. And it becomes critical when environments are uncertain. Now, when you adopt agile, you're embracing and acknowledging that uncertainty is just inherent. So, how do you go about building trust? Trust is built slowly, over time and through lots of small interactions. In her book, "Dare to Lead", Dr. Brune Brown details seven elements of building trust that emerged from her research, which you can remember by the acronym, BRAVING. These elements are habits that you can work on individually, but also focus on cultivating as a team. Boundaries. It's important to understand what other people value. Know what's okay and what's not okay. And, be able to say no. Reliability. This is about keeping promises, as well as being honest of your own limitations. Accountability. When mistakes happen, take ownership, apologize and make amends. Vault. This one is about being sensitive about experiences that aren't yours to share. Integrity. Talk is cheap. Putting your values into action matters. Non-judgment. The ability to discuss how we feel, what we need and where we need help without judgment is important. Generosity. Instead of immediately criticizing or blaming someone else, use the most generous interpretation possible towards their intentions, words, and actions. By working on the factors that build trust, you're on your way to laying the groundwork for a strong agile culture.
Mission, vision, and values
Crystal clear statements that outline goals and expected behaviour are an important framework for an agile culture. When a mission statement, vision statement, and a set of five to seven core values are used throughout your daily work, you can empower your team, provide greater ownership over decision making, and then give your team more of that autonomy that they're craving. Some tips to help you write your own mission, vision, and core values. First, be short and specific. Next is to create statements that are unique to you and your situation. Finally, use concrete, strong, inspirational action words.
Agile anti-patterns and anti-dotes
Shame versus empathy
If you're looking to implement an effective agile culture, then getting good at rooting out all that shame and blame becomes an important part of the work. Shame is the fear of being disconnected and feeling unworthy of belonging. Shame can eat away at the foundation of your culture. But it happens behind the scenes, and then it manifests itself in unhealthy team behaviours like back-channelling, discrimination, coverups, perfectionism, and more. Blame is another way that shame manifests. And here's how it works. When we feel the intense pain of shame, we create an emotional discharge through blame, because we don't want to feel that feeling. And these concepts of shame and blame are deeply ingrained in developer culture, even down to the tooling. There's an incredibly powerful antidote to shame: empathy. - Empathy is a perspective-taking practice. And to do that, Dr. Brown shares five skills to focus on honing. The first is to learn to see the world as others see it. And to do this, you get curious about people's perspectives. And honour it as the truth, even when that truth is different from yours. Second is to learn the be nonjudgmental, which, for some of us, can be hard. We tend to judge in areas where we feel the most shame. Next is to understand another person's feelings and then also communicate your understanding of those feelings. Build up emotional literacy. And that way, you can discuss the nuances of a wide range of emotions. And finally, honing your ability to be curious, pay attention, and notice details through mindfulness.
Heroes versus teams
Building a team based on hero culture can have a lot of unintended side effects. Daniel Kimble is the CEO of Residence Executive Coaching, over the years, has observed six reasons why a hero culture should be kept in check. First, being a hero is addictive. While we want to reward team members for doing good work, hailing only heroes can cause people to crave that adoration above anything else. It might not seem like a big deal, but this can compromise overall product quality, because there's a lot of glory in swooping in to save the day rather than solving those underlying problems and preventing those from happening in the first place. Next, not everyone can be a hero because, if everyone is a hero, then no one is. When only a few people get the lion's share of the attention and all the rewards, then other people feel like they can't measure up to impossible standard. Third, heroes hide deeper problems. Heroes mask inefficient processes. Instead of rewarding heroes, spend time thinking about why heroes need to exist in the first place. Fourth, heroes inevitably create burnout. And that's because there's often an immense amount of personal sacrifice that's required to be a hero, you end up spending all this time with late nights and insane hours. You put work ahead of your family and your own well-being and all of that comes at a cost. In the short term, you're going to lose productivity because of fatigue and in the long term, you risk complete burnout. Fifth, heroes spawn information hoarding and turf building. Once you're a hero, you don't want to lose your coveted status so there's a motive to hide information and protect your turf. Lastly, heroes disempower, and they don't scale. There's little to no incentive for heroes to spend time leveling up the skills on the rest of the team. And often, heroism leads to jealousy, infighting, and just a toxic culture where you lose out in the long run. What should you do instead? There are several principles that point to the benefit of cross-functional, self-organizing teams that work at a sustainable pace. In an agile culture, the emphasis moves from glorying one or two individuals to celebrating success as a team. Individuals bring their strengths and passions to the group and work together as a team to deliver working, quality software quickly and with excellence.
Stress versus calm
Stress can be good, particularly for achieving short-term goals. But when it comes to executive functioning and making good strategic decisions stress can be detrimental. Chronic stress can even lead to burnout. Instead, we want to work smarter in ways that keep our prefrontal cortex, which is the part of the brain that's in charge of executive functioning, engaged so that we can work effectively and minimize reactiveness. Two principles in particular: 1. Build projects around motivated individuals. Give them the environment and the support that they need and trust them to get the job done. One of the leading causes of stress at work comes from what's called task-related stress. And this is being told to do something but then not really having the autonomy or the resources to do it. We can alleviate this task-related stress on our teams by encouraging people to listen to each other, giving them the resources they need and then empowering them to experiment and find solutions together. This mindset of continuous improvement is the mark of a really healthy agile team. 2. Agile processes promote sustainable development. The sponsors, developers, and users should be able to maintain a constant pace indefinitely.
Failure versus experimentation
In an agile culture, we don't see failure as the end goal. We see it as an unexpected result that we can learn from. We use experimentation and continuous improvement to help us adapt and then course correct as necessary. With this mindset, failure through unexpected outcomes helps us grow and it makes our systems and our teams stronger through emergent design. In an article published in the Harvard Business Review, Julian Birkinshaw and Martine Haas outlined a three-step process for using failure as an asset. First, learn from every failure. Regular reflection is an important practice to evaluate where you can be better. Rather than just feeling depleted by failure, embrace it, as a learning opportunity, and adapt. Next, share your lessons. Your learning doesn't stop with you or your team. Create a communication infrastructure for sharing your learning across your entire organization. Finally, review your pattern of failure. Gather data and look for how your approach is working.
Efficiency versus responsiveness
Companies need to shift from being efficient to being responsive = agile.
Silos versus collaboration
Silos, great for farms, not so great for Agile teams. The short-term gains are lost to the long-term burdens. To get good at breaking down silos, focus on collaboration, Heidi Gardners' research shows that the more that organizations collaborate, and specifically those that are knowledge-based, the greater their bottom-line results in both revenue and profit. Collaborative organizations also have higher customer retention rates, are more innovative, manage risk better, and enjoy higher employee productivity and loyalty. So, while individuals can focus on being more collaborative in their day-to-day work, there are also many systemic issues that must be addressed to make collaboration part of the culture. And these include restructuring performance metrics and compensation, paying attention to how information flows throughout an organization, and in general, a communication pattern that resembles a network, rather than a traditional hierarchy, or a hub-and-spoke model. Those are going to have greater levels of collaboration. Reviewing terminology and taxonomies used to organize system, and then refreshing them when they become outdated, and investing in the resources, technologies, and tools that encourage collaboration.
Building your team
Play to strengths
When you start to organize your team in a way that everyone can play to their strengths, you've got the beginnings of a high functioning environment. When work doesn't align with our natural skills, abilities, and passions, we end up not contributing to our highest potential, and that means that the entire team can suffer. But when we're intentional about aligning our work to our passions and our purpose, it can feel like pure magic. Individuals are more empowered and resilient. It's also easier to develop the traits required for psychological safety, such as compassion, open communication and respect. There are many different tools to help you assess the strengths of your team. And two popular ones include CliftonStrengths and VIA Character Strengths.
Diversity, inclusion, and belonging
When we start to assemble our teams, it can be so tempting to bring on people whose personalities and strengths are just like our own. Organizations that invest in building teams that have diverse backgrounds, perspectives, and ideas are more likely to benefit from positive outcomes. However, teams also have to think about ways to create culture. It is inclusive and provides every single individual with a sense of psychological safety and belonging. Psychological safety is to ensure that everyone has the same access to opportunities and that everyone's ideas are heard and respected. Belonging is the ability to bring your whole self to work, and to operate from a place of authenticity. Successful, agile teams incorporate all three aspects. Diversity, inclusion, and belonging to their team building efforts. They also recognize the power of cross-functional teams, and embrace a wide range of skills, perspectives, and backgrounds.
Support success
When we think about what makes a successful agile team, we need to consider a few different things. We need to think about interpersonal relationships, and we also need to think about the organizational systems in which those relationships exist. There are two tools to help us make sure that the structure of our teams is arranged so that we can maximize effectiveness within that complex system, Conway's Law and symmathesy:
Conway's Law focuses on communication within an organization and describes how the design of our work product is dependent on the communication structures that we use to develop them. "Organizations which design systems are constrained "to produce designs which are copies "of the communication structures of those organizations." So, if you want your work product to be flexible, modular, and easy to work with, you first have to pay attention to how your team communicates. Communication structures that are focused on hierarchy create rigid work products that are brittle and difficult to change, and that's not what we want within a software system. Communication structures that resemble networks lead to software systems or other work products that are more resilient, modular, and easier to change.
Symmathesy. This is a term that was developed by Nora Bateson, and it describes mutual learning that occurs within a system. In this context, a system isn't distilled just into the parts that comprise a greater whole, but instead the system emerges, and it develops because of the complex interactions within it. The team includes the people we work with, and the software itself. The software is part of the symmathesy. We learn from it, from its error messages "and logs and the data that's collected. "And it learns from us, because we change it," end quote. Recognizing the systemic and complex interplays that occur to develop software can help you develop the organizational infrastructure that your team needs to thrive.
Enable flow
Have you ever had an experience where you were so engrossed in your work that it felt like you were just becoming one with the work? Time flies and you just feel incredibly engaged and you've got this amazing sense of accomplishment to the point where you almost find yourself in a trance, and it just feels like pure joy. It is what researcher Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi describes as flow. How you motivate yourself and others has a huge impact on how easy it is to get to that flow state. Flow is best attained when individuals are motivated from within rather than from external sources. In his book "Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us", author Daniel Pink describe. three elements that have to exist for intrinsic motivation. 1. Autonomy. Individuals need to feel like they have a sense of control over their work, and Pink subdivides this into four critical areas: tasks, time, technique, and team. Now the foundations of Agile are really built around the idea of autonomy. We've got self-organizing teams and trust baked into its principles. 2. Mastery, which Pink defines as the desire to get better at something that matters. Ins Agile team, we have concepts like continuous improvement and technical excellence, and all of that contributes to mastery. 3. Purpose. The most deeply motivated people, most productive and satisfied, hitch their desires to a cause larger than themselves. Teams that can articulate that larger vision and then connect the context that an individual's work has in getting those goals accomplished, they enjoy more intrinsic motivation and therefore more flow.
The nine dimensions of flow as outlined by Csikszentmihalyi: Does your team have a presence of clear goals, availability of immediate feedback, a match of challenges with adequate personal skills, the merging of action and awareness, focused attention and concentration on the task at hand, perception of control over the situation, a loss of self-consciousness, absorption so intense that it alters the sense of time, and intrinsic motivation and autonomous initiative. When you optimize for flow and intrinsic motivation, you're well on your way to creating an Agile culture.
Regular reflection
Setting aside time for teams to regularly reflect is an important part of agile culture. Retrospectives are powerful tools, and they help teams learn and grow together. Psychological safety is critical for reflection, because we need to be able to talk about all of those things that may not have been so great. People need to be able to speak their mind, be vulnerable, and take emotional risks. You won't be able to uncover root causes unless you've built trust, and a culture of openness and honesty. In their book "Agile Retrospectives: Making "Good Teams Great," Diana Larsen and Esther Derby provide a variety of exercises to help teams set the stage for their reflection. How often should you reflect? What does that regular interval look like? Well, each team is going to develop their own cadence.
Empowering Individuals
Candor and conflict
Part of building an agile culture is creating an environment where people can be candid, disagree and debate. The goal is to lead from a place where you both care personally and challenge directly.. All of that trust and that psychological safety is the foundation for us to have these open and honest, and often really difficult conversations. Agile is not about hiding our feelings and opinions so that we project this appearance of all getting along. It's about getting to the heart of what is hard so that we can continuously improve. And in this sense, healthy conflict is an important aspect of a strong, agile culture.
Growth mindset
Caron Dweck's research shows that a growth mindset, which she defines as, "the belief that your basic qualities "are things you that you cultivate through your efforts," is strongly correlated to positive outcomes in school, sports, business, relationships, and many other contexts. The opposite of a growth mindset is the fixed mindset, which Dweck defines as, "believing that your qualities are carved in stone." Research shows that people who have this fixed mindset, they use unsavoury tactics, kind of as a coping mechanism. They blame people, they shirk responsibility, they tend to be micromanagers or work too hard. The world of software is dynamic and ever-changing, and there will always be these mental obstacles that we have to overcome. When we adopt a growth mindset, we can persevere and learn and improve.
Some suggestions for fostering a growth mindset on your team. First, teach your team about the growth mindset, and help them yet each other. When you hear someone use fixed mindset phrases, remind them that they are smart, and they are capable. They might not understand how to get through something right now, but you know that with enough dedication, they can figure it out. Next, root out obstacles and roadblocks to learning by asking people what they need to be successful. How can I support you is an incredibly powerful question. Third, praise and reward the effort and learning that you observe. Studies show that this keeps people motivated to keep going, even when the times get tough. Fourth, encourage people with strong business skills to join mob sessions or take courses about coding.
Embrace negotiation
Negotiation is a constant process on an Agile team. Competing priorities often require people to debate differing points of view and then agree on the best path forward. Negotiation is a necessary part of working on an Agile team because unlike command and control structures, the team doesn't just take orders from above. Rather, they collaborate and discover together how to best achieve their goals. Agreement without this negotiation is called groupthink, and that's a marker of a dysfunctional team that can have profound negative outcomes. So, when teams get good at negotiating, they can respond to change, navigate challenges, and then agree on next steps with more speed and less effort. If you want to become a more effective negotiator, here are some tips. First, become crystal clear on what you want. Wheeler describes this as a reckoning of your needs, priorities, and trade-offs, as well as your fallback options if negotiation becomes stalemated. You'll also want to get smart on who you're negotiating with. What are their needs and challenges and desires? Building empathy. Develop situational awareness. Learn to observe changes, and then think about how you might react. Embrace improvisation as a successful part of negotiation. Build trust and forward momentum through small agreements. And finally, be careful not to push too far. Keep the endgame in mind and learn to balance short-term setbacks with long-term gains.
Clear and compassionate communication
While communication is a critical component of a project's success, there are definitely some challenges when communicating on a software project. First, software is, for the most part, an intangible project. It tends to be more abstract, and that means it's more prone to misunderstanding. Second, there are a variety of different skills required to build software, from big picture business skills, to atomic commits from the people who write the code, and this means that sometimes people with different experiences struggle to understand each other. Finally, semantics. Semantics refers to the meaning of the words and symbols we use. Getting everyone semantically aligned is one of the biggest challenges that I've encountered when it comes to communicating on a software team. Here are some suggestions on how you can focus on improving your communication. Get curious and learn about clear communication. And make improving your communication skills an ongoing practice. Slow down, take deep breaths, be mindful. Practice your listening skills as much as your presenting skills, because both are important. Use methodologies and practices that help create a shared understanding. Work together, find ways to collaborate and communicate regularly. Develop software as a group through practices such as mob programming. Ask questions when you don't understand something. And be patient, and kind, when you're asked to explain.
Tech career skills: moving from developer to engineering manager
Moving to management
Many people think of management skills and people skills as something inborn rather than something you can learn. Don't worry. Management skills are indeed skills and they're ones you can learn. In this course, we'll learn more about what skills you can develop to start out strong in management. This course aims to give you the tools you need to transition from a technical sole contributor to managing people in tech.
What do managers do?
As a manager, you might find yourself tasked with taking often abstract goals and vision from your executive teams and then breaking these down into actually actionable goals, which you can then work towards with your team. You're also going to be taking feedback and information from your team back up to your own manager and back up to those executive teams as you advocate for your team. You're going to need to check in with them regularly. Speaking to your team as a whole and with members of your team one on one will be part of most managers' experience. These meetings can also be leveraged to help work with your reports to manage their work life balance. As part of advocating for your team, you're going to need to work with other people both in and outside your company to make sure your team members have the tools, the support and the information they need to do great work. You'll also be meeting regularly with your own managers and perhaps meeting with project leads, maybe clients and loads of other stakeholders. For each member of your team to grow professionally they're going to need those clear, actionable goals to shoot for. Coaching them around these goals is going to be part of your day to day job. To let them know how they're doing relative to these goals, you're going to want to give them clear and effective feedback as often as you can. Part of this feedback cycle will include rewards or maybe you can reward their hard work with a promotion or maybe a raise. Given enough time working as a manager, a review-related task that most managers will eventually have to face is giving references for one of your team members when they're ready to move on to a new role, either within your company or somewhere else out in the industry.
Skills and attributes you need as a manager
As a manager, you're going to be sort of generally responsible for the work that's assigned to your team, check in on the status of tasks assigned and help make sure that they're being done. You'll also be responsible for making sure the work assigned to your team is reasonable, that it's well-scoped, and really, that it's possible for your team to accomplish. This is part of your larger duty to your team and to your reports to help them balance the demands of their work with their personal lives (work/life balance). It helps your team members and the team have satisfying, sustainable lives outside of their jobs. If your teams are well-rested, they're going to be more resistant to burnout, and research piece after research piece has tied employee satisfaction with their home lives to better creativity, lower turnover, and other exciting, great business outcomes. Your team members are going to develop professionally as you manage them. As their manager, one of the most rewarding responsibilities you'll have is to guide them through their professional development. Helping you report set, clear career goals and guiding them along the path of these goals is going to be a large part of your work with each individual. Their long-term career goals may eventually take them outside of your team or even your company, but you've got to be ready to support them no matter how much you wish they would stay. One of the largest is working to balance the fiduciary and contractual obligations to a company when they might conflict with the ethical duties we have to the individuals we manage. As a manager, you're going to have to decide for yourself where to draw those ethical lines.
Holding one-on-one meetings
One-to-one meetings are regular discussions with one of your team members at a time that you're going to hold in a room conducive to confidential discussion. One-to-ones are more than just status updates. They're a great way to learn about the stress levels on your team or the health of your team. And they're an important part of your toolkit to build trusted relationships. To conduct a meaningful one-to-one, you can prepare by creating an agenda beforehand and taking notes during the one-to-one. Keep in mind, you're unlikely to forget, but your team members are people, with lives outside of work. Taking an interest in their whole selves is something many great managers do. They took notes, unobtrusively as they talked, to follow up on some of these points later. Good managers help their team members maintain good work-life balance. Having these in-person conversations allow managers to spot potential problems early. If you're managing remote teams, try to meet regularly via video calls with both of you in a quiet room, conducive to private conversation.
Agendas, note taking, and documentation
Keeping detailed notes helps you create a record that you can use as guidance to work out why things have gone wrong or hey, why things are going right. These records you keep can also be used as evidence that your report needs to be rewarded when they're going above and beyond. Structuring your notetaking around agendas for meetings like one to ones can help keep meetings moving along as intended as well as provide a framework to track notes and issues. There may be action items for you coming out of one to ones with each employee. Make sure that you're keeping track of things in an easy-to-access way. Taking these notes in a shared doc can let both you and your team members add context during and after your meetings, but as a manager you may also want to keep a copy of your notes that you don't share with your team members. These notes could include anonymous feedback, observations about the feedback you've shared, and notes on any sour review or disciplinary processes.
Reviews and assessments
Review time is going to be a busy time for you as a new manager. Reviews are regular assessment periods where the performance of an employee is examined. The outcomes of reviews can impact bonuses, pay, promotion and the professional status of people on your team. The notes you've been taking will be a valuable asset to you in review time. Reviews are designed to help assess your team's performance. Equip them for success in reviews by clearly communicating the standards to which they'll be judged. Set clear goals with your team and then let me demonstrate evidence of their success in reviews. Make sure you check back regularly on their progress. And help coach them towards success. Take these reviews seriously. They may have serious impacts for each person on your team. You want to be sure that their pay and benefits are competitive and fair. Clearly document each team members current work level and the progress they've made since the last review period. Interleaving direct quotes of feedback from co-workers and clients in review documentation can help you clearly evidence the value each person brings.
Letting go of the keyboard
Shifting your mindset from coding to coaching
As a manager, you have the potential to have a much bigger impact on your products and your projects than you would as a single contributor. But this often comes at the cost of having to step back from working on development or design as part of your daily tasks. You're going to be keeping track of your team and your progress towards shared goals. You likely won't be able to scale your attention to cover all of your management tasks and intensive hands-on technical work, you're going to need to step away from the keyboard to delegate. It can be tempting to just do it yourself when you have the technical skills to solve a problem, but letting your team learn and build these skills themselves will help make sure that your team can do great work, even when you're not there to be hands-on. Activities like pair programming can be a great route to sample letting go and to practice supporting your team members in their professional development. As a manager with a technical background, you'll still sometimes be called upon to help out in hands-on ways, but by doing this in thoughtful, conscious ways, you can help ensure that you're teaching your team to work self-sufficiently.
Approach technical problems as a manager
When you were a sole contributor, you were responsible for your technical contributions to the team. But as a manager, you're going to be called upon to help deliver solutions to technical problems that are larger and more complex than a single person could hope to solve. To begin a group effort for these large or complex technical challenges, you're going to first need to work with your team to scope this problem down and break it into manageable chunks. Then look around at your team, at their skills, and the interests of your team members to help make good decisions on who to assign these different segments of work. Make sure that you're delegating tasks not only on a team member's ability to do the work but also on their learning goals and their interests, and as equally throughout the team as possible. Now the best thing you can do to address this technical problem is to monitor progress and offer focused support. Keep score and cheer your team on while making sure they have the resources and the autonomy they need to make good decisions. When your team is stuck on a technical approach to a problem that just isn't working or maybe they're otherwise deadlocked, it's time for you to shift mindsets from acting as their coach. Ask direct questions about the project's direction. Use information from your 1:1s and project status reports to decide if this current approach to your technical problem is worth continuing.
Managing junior developers
Working with junior talent often requires a high level of contact with your junior team members, especially if this is their first time working in a technical role. It's especially important that you book regular one-to-one time with your more junior employees. Don’t spend too much time focusing on the negative challenges the junior developer encounters, better move on to ask focused questions about the work being done and about what they learned. Highlight positive things about their work and suggested further opportunities for development. Also, make sure you're checking in with your junior developers outside of formal one-to-ones and meetings. Pair with them or partner on working projects when you can, and source opportunities for them to work with their peers of different skill levels. One of the main goals in onboarding and upskilling junior developers is to help them develop the skills and the confidence they need to contribute to the team. Make sure they also getting time to work independently. Be sure they're learning the problem solving and the technical skills you want them to bring to the team and to the future careers. Be sure that they're getting the chance to work on a varied range of exciting projects. Don't just give them the easy work.
Managing senior developers
How can you help guide and support someone who knows more than you do? Much of the work you do with very experienced talent on your team is going to be around goal setting, coaching and supporting them. This is going to feel a lot like managing your junior and your mid-level team members. Don’t bluff and don’t pretend technical knowledge you don't have. You can source other senior team members for technical review help, and make sure this high-level knowledge is being shared throughout the team. Skill sharing helps you build resilience into your team. It benefits you as a manager as well as providing rewarding new experiences for your more junior talent. Your senior talent can also benefit from exchanges like these. Experience mentoring, pairing with and supporting junior talent will let them learn skills that help them grow into different senior roles in the future.
Assess tech skills outside your expertise
You'll eventually get the chance to manage someone whose technical skillset just doesn't overlap with yours. This can be an exciting chance to learn about technical topics outside your understanding, but it can provide unique challenges for a manager. Managers don't need to be able to do the job of every team member, but you should have enough understanding of their work to describe their role and describe most of their daily tasks. If you don't have a good grasp of their working capabilities, you're not going to be able to effectively support them. If their technical skills are far enough outside your own skillset, you must learn their field. You’re managing them and you're working closely with them, which, should hopefully provide you opportunities to talk to them and to learn. Where possible, ask someone else in an appropriate level to help review the work outside your skillset. Be aware that sourcing review from the team member's peers or people they manage may be challenging in some workplace cultures. In preparing for reviews on work that's outside your technical skillset, look back at your notes and at the output of their work. Did they usually deliver on what they promised? If not, why not?
Cross-team collaboration
We've already learned a lot about how managers work to facilitate communication between themselves and their teams. Managers also play a valuable role in enabling work between teams in and outside of their organizations. E.g.:  how teams work with the executive and strategic teams within their organization. You'll be given goals and requirements from the levels above you, and then you'll bring these to your team. In healthy workplace cultures, you should also be able to take the needs and concerns of your team through feedback back up to leadership to help shape how you work together. Collaborating with leadership teams can involve a lot of workplace politics. You may also be called upon to facilitate work between your team and other teams internally. For this, you're going to understand how the internal politics of working with these other teams will impact your work. When you're collaborating with internal teams, you can often count on there being a great deal of alignment in shared goals. It is an effective way to share information without dragging all the members of both your teams into meeting after meeting. The collaboration pattern that many managers find the most challenging is when you're going to need to facilitate work between your team and external stakeholders. Relationships of these types will often be defined through contracts or other legal structures. The shared goals of collaboration with these internal teams are often defined through these processes. This can be challenging because you have less institutional insight into the priorities of external teams. Not being able to tell their level of commitment or the resources they've allocated to shared efforts, can lead to mismatched expectations.
Managers as advocates
Mentoring as an engineering manager
Mentorship is the formal or the informal practice of supporting another person through their personal or their professional development. Team members can be mentored by their manager, their peers or almost everyone. Mentorship can add value to your team in many ways. Mentorship between your team members can help build bonds of trust that contribute to healthy working relationships. Team members who are receiving mentorship, they gain new skills as they benefit from the experience of their mentors. Mentors can develop soft skills and people management skills that will benefit their day to day work with their peers. Both mentors and mentees will benefit from the exchange by getting additional perspectives and approaches to their work. You may want to look at ways that you can set up structured mentoring relationships. Would assigning a more senior member to a new team member fit how your team works? And how would you recognize and reward mentorship in reviews?
Advocating for your direct reports
One of the most impactful things you can do for the people you manage is to advocate for them. Advocacy for the members of your team could be around the conditions of their work, such as overtime, pay, or promotions. Or it may also centre around better access to resources, access to information, or agency for your team to do great things. It is campaigning for them to get what they deserve but in the good way. You’ll need to clearly understand both their current status and performance in your company as well as your company's culture. You can advocate for your employees both when their performance warrants a reward, but also when their performance suggests they need some extra support to succeed. For employees performing well, this could mean showing evidence of this performance to leadership with requests for a higher salary or for bonuses, a more flexible schedule, or other perks. As a manager, you have a larger amount of power and influence than most sole contributors will. It's your responsibility to use this additional power and to advocate for your team.
Ethical considerations in management
Some of the ethical requirements you'll face as a manager we formalized, perhaps is written guidance for your company, or even as laws. Other ethical boundaries in your work will be made up of highly personal judgments based on your values. Ethical challenges that are less formalized or unwritten can be much more challenging for managers to navigate, especially for new managers. While there may be shared ethical standards in the workplace, they can often be difficult to sort out as a new manager. A good example might be to think about how you'd like to react if the needs of your business or your project began to directly conflict with the best interest of a team member (e.g.: if a work project began requiring regular unpaid overtime from members of your tea).  Think critically about ethical questions like these before they arise. This will leave you best able to act in ways you're willing to live with. If you speak to your own manager about the way similar situations have been handled in the past, this can give you a good benchmark for company culture and ethics. But you shouldn't use this in lieu of your own good judgment. Sharing your own thoughts on different ethical aspects of your work is a fantastic way to help take your own ethical framework and make it part of the wider company culture. As a manager, you have a unique opportunity to help steer your team and your workplace towards more ethical, more equitable modes of working.
Having difficult conversations
Discussions about difficulties between team members, poor performance or even crises such as harassment may be part of your life as a manager. Before you go into a difficult conversation, first, make sure you've gathered all the relevant information about the issue. Take your notes into your conversation, so you'll have all the facts to hand. It can be tempting to minimize or avoid difficult conversations, especially when you have friendly relationships to maintain. But as a manager, it's important and it's fair to address difficult issues early and directly. To keep from minimizing or softening the discussion, you may want to structure your notes as an outline for the conversation. Speak to your team member in a quiet, confidential space. Clearly outline the issue, the changes or the corrections that should be made, and what next steps they can expect. If there are consequences from this issue, discuss what outcomes are possible. It's natural for people to become defensive during difficult conversations. Give your team member appropriate time and space to respond, but don't let the conversation get side-tracked. If appropriate, have the team member sign or document their understanding of the information you've shared. For serious issues, you may also want to follow up on your in-person conversation with an email or other document outlining the issue. Share further information about the issue if ongoing outcomes or follow up are involved. If this is a performance or an interpersonal issue that requires additional follow up, you'll need to continue to closely monitor the situation. Be willing to continue to document and to intervene as needed.
Growing Management and technical skills
Maintain and expand your technical skills
Moving from a technical role into a role as a manager could lead you to a lot less hands-on technical work, which with enough time, can make it difficult to keep your tech skills sharp. But while you're building your new management skills, there are also approaches you can take to keep your tech skills up to date. Sit down, and list all of the management, all of the business, and all of the technical skills that you want to develop, or you want to maintain in the next year. Making a list of everything you want to learn and then carefully prioritizing your most important learnings can keep things from getting overwhelming. Then, make time for learning opportunities. As a manager, you're going to need to prioritize the learning and development for your team members over your own. By setting clear goals and logging the work you're putting into learning experiences, you can help get the most out of the time that you do have. Learning materials be books, technical podcast, in-person conference or a meetup, or any number of social tech experiences.
Growing your management skills
A single course can't possibly give you all the skills you'll need as a manager. You continue to deepen your technical knowledge throughout your career, you'll want to keep building these management skills. There's a host of resources out there. Setting clear goals for your own professional development can help you stay on track while also logging your learning. Pairing your goals with a learning journal can help you keep the same kind of documentation you keep as a manager, but for your own professional development. Think critically. What would make serving your team easier? What skills gaps do you see in your work with them? What kinds of feedback could you source from your team or your own manager to help you drive your future learning? Trust yourself.
Setting goals with your team
One of the biggest benefits to being a manager is that you and your team are going to be able to accomplish much more than you were able to accomplish as an individual. But to make progress towards these bigger wins, you're going to need to work with your team to set and track good goals. The goals you work towards with your team and teammates will sometimes be handed down from higher up in the business and sometimes be developed within your team. Large or big picture goals will be best achieved by breaking these down into smaller, more manageable milestones that will lead to your big win. These smaller goals have the benefit of being easier to track. Make sure that as you're setting goals, these goals are measurable. Your team members should be encouraged to set individual goals. These goals are a great place to have them articulate their learning and professional development needs.

--- LL Courses Week 6 - Content.docx ---
LinkedIn Learning Courses Week 6
Key Takeaways
Contents
Week 5. Motivation, Engagement, Influence2
Week 6. Motivation, Engagement, Influence
Inspirational Leadership Skills: Practical Motivation
What is an inspirational leader?
Leader vs. manager differences
The inspirational leader is both a leader and a manager. Leadership is more about vision and it's more about communication and motivation, whereas, management is more about organization and planning and control. All bosses must do both. Leaders must do a certain amount of planning and organizing, and managers have to do a certain amount of motivating, and ideally, you would do all of those, you would be great at both.
Creating a vision
The inspirational leader provides a vision. And we all want a vision. We all want to have somewhere we're heading towards. But can a middle manager create a vision just for their own area? And the answer is, yes you can. Vision comes from knowing your market, knowing what your customers really want. What your competitors doing? And then working out the future trends. Where are the customers wanting to go to? And where is the technology allowing you to go to? What's the technology that's on the horizon? Where is the market going? Where are you capable of going? Which bit of the future market are you going to be able to reach at the right time? And people want to know how that they can help in the overall vision. Everybody wants to be part of generating a vision if they're allowed to. Ideally you'd say, "this is the vision of where we're going to go and this is the plan of how we'll get there." We've got a plan that's in stages drawn out as a gantt chart or whatever and that's how we're going to achieve the vision and that's your bit there, that's how you can contribute. Involve people in the setting of the vision or at least show them how they can help to achieve it, what is their part going to be in the plan? That's the first component of being an inspirational leader, providing a vision.
Role model
The inspirational leader is a role model. And this is because your team watch you much more than you realize. They're always watching what you do, and they're going to copy what you do. What sort of things would they be looking for? What sort of things should you do? 1. Be approachable. 2. Never get angry, always remain calm and positive about mistakes, even if they've just deleted everything on the computer. You just got to say, that's okay, I'm here to help, let's have a look at what's happened, let's see how we can put it right. 3. If someone does something that you think is not good, just say to them, that's not acceptable. You know, we've got to do that better. So, everybody knows what the rules are. 4. Always be positive. We can do it, if there's a problem, we can fix it. If there's a big demanding goal that we're all trying to achieve, we can do it. They're all copying you, they're all looking to you to see whether you're positive or not. You've got to believe that you can do it. And then that will then transmit to your team. So positive belief in your head before you even start talking to people. 5. Another thing that they're always looking for is what you focus on. Always focusing on the good things, even when things don't work out, at least they nearly got there. 6. Be a role model with the customers. Be patient, friendly, really nice with customers, even if that may not be how you feel, because your team are looking at you. 7. You've got to be honest, they’re thinking, how is this person authentic? Are they telling me the truth? Are they honest? And I think sometimes that means admitting that you have worries and problems. I think this is not the same as not being positive. But admitting that you don't always know the answer, but you're going to be able to solve it, it's going to be fine. 8. Never criticize people behind their backs because then that's going to spread. 9. Support your boss. Now this is a difficult one because I think you've got to support your boss, but also be honest. So, when you people come to you and say, the big boss has asked us to do this and it's a rubbish idea. It's really important not to go, urgh I know, isn't it, but we better do it, then you're undermining your boss, you absolutely must say, no, no, I think it's a good plan. I know it looks difficult, but he or she is right, and we need to do this. If you don't entirely agree with the boss's plan, you can still be honest, say, I know it looks difficult, but they know about these things. They've got the bigger view. And although we can't see why I think we've got to follow it. 9. And finally, keep learning yourself, keep going on training courses, keep developing, because then, your people will look at you. And they'll think, well, you know, he or she goes on training courses all the time. So that's obviously the thing that I should be doing as well. You mustn't be saying to them, you've got to improve, but I'm already perfect.
Communication
Types of communication and meetings
The inspirational leader must put time and effort into communicating. The person who communicates leads. You have to do plenty of it and you have to make sure it's reasonably good (quantity & quality). Take opportunities to talk. There are four types of meeting. 1. Weekly team meeting. They should be informal, fun, just very short. Everyone just says what they're doing. What do you got on this week. Anything that they're worried about or stuck on just a very quick five minutes each. If somebody brings up a big problem, then we'll put that aside for a separate thing. 2. The problem-solving meeting. A small number of people, but for a longer time. It's an open ended, it's a creative meeting, there may not even be an agenda, the agenda might be just work on this problem, have ideas for the future, something like that. 3. The boss talking to the whole team. It has a large number of people but for a short time. What's happened in the previous year? What's the future coming up? Have PowerPoint carefully prepared. That's the yellow meeting. And that's a top down meeting. They're allowed to ask occasional question for clarification. But it's not a discussion. 4. The progress meeting. Medium number of people for a medium length of time. You would meet once a month, and everybody would report on how their part was getting on. What are we going to do about this to get this back on track? What are you going to do? How can anybody else help you to get it back on track?
There are four methods of communication that a leader must use. 1. Management by walking about. The leader needs to walk around the whole office or the whole organization. And this might take half an hour to an hour every day. Maybe you spend a day on reception or on the Help Desk, pick one of the more unpleasant jobs if you can, and spend a day doing that. It sends a fantastic signal to the people that you don't think you're above anybody. There's nothing that you're not prepared to do. You see a lot and you learn a lot when you do that. And you have a chance to talk to them about things. Within an hour, they'll all be telling you the truth about what they think about the company and how they don't know what's going on. 2. The second one is team meetings. 3. Cascading down. This is where you tell your team what's going on. And if you've got quite a few layers, the risk is that the message can be quite different by the time it gets down to the bottom. But nevertheless, there should still be a cascading down of information. 4. The all in one go communication. Where you stand on a chair, and you talk to the whole group. the whole organization. And then everyone gets the same information.
The list I'd get fired for
The Inspirational Leader is obsessed with communication. And that means they have to get information about what's going on so that they can then communicate it to their team. You have to think, am I a good enough communicator? Do I communicate enough to people? Have I got enough information to tell them what's going on? Could I get more information from my boss? And how am I going to do it? Am I going to put up a notice? Am I going to give talks? I'm going to have meetings or maybe all three of those things?
The best leader I've ever seen
The inspirational leader is not just a good talker, but they're a great listener as well. So, as well as telling people stuff, you need to find out what's on their minds. And this means getting to know them. Getting to really understand them. To put some time aside to just listening to your people is important. And it has all sorts of benefits because it makes them feel safer as well as making them feel valued. Listen to them but also act on what they tell you so that they can see that you really have listened. It's not enough just to listen, you've got to do something about it. They're desperate to know whether you're listening to them or not. So, find a way to show them that you really have listened. And this means getting to know all about them. You need to know about their family and their personal life, to an extent, anyway. You don't want to tell people everything about your personal life. But to be reasonably open with people is important because then they'll be open with you. And you must get to know your staff because unless you can understand them, you can't motivate them. There won't be a bond between them and you and there won't be any loyalty. Make notes if necessary. If that helps you remember people, do that. You must remember not only names, but if you could remember a fact or two about them as well, then that's even better. That's vital. And then your objective is to talk to them as much as you can. Be a great listener. Discover what they're interested in. Discover what their strengths are. Because everybody has strengths and quite often, the people who work for you will not be fully using their strengths. They might be very creative, for example, and you might discover that because of what they do in their spare time. And then you might then be able to offer them a slightly more creative side to their job. And that would be win-win for both of you.
What a great listener does
The inspirational leader is a great listener. Active listening means asking questions, you pull information out and you signal to them that you really are listening. What does a great listener do? What does great listening look like? There is a model called the questioning funnel, in which the idea is that you start with open questions like, "How are you getting on?" Or, " How's work?" Or, "How are you finding the new machines?" Then there's probing questions of, "Really, tell me more about that, "why do you find that bit difficult?" And "What's good about it, what's bad about it?" Then you might finish with a closed question of, "So would you like me to get that fixed for you?" So those are the yes or no questions. Now, you can't always use the same probing question, but if you had three or four that you just alternated, you could probably get away with that your whole life. Ideally you would be probably only talking 10% of the time, so you would be asking a question for say 10%, and then they would be answering for 90%, and then you'd be asking another question. If you just do question, answer, question, answer, it is a bit too much like an interrogation. There's a refinement, which is question, answer, comment, question, answer, comment. To be a little comment, just to show that you've really listened, and you've understood, and it's actually quite a good discipline to always comment because it forces you to listen. Important also is body language while listening.  When you're talking to me, I need to be looking at you and I need to be nodding and making the occasional listening noise as well. Ooh, oh, hmm, ah, like that. I need to be nodding, and he's been making little listening noises, so that you know that I'm listening. And even if you want to look at your watch, don't even if there's something really interesting happening over there. Don't look, you got to absolutely have that eye contact and then nodding and listening, so make sure your body language is good, and make sure that you don't start to monopolize the conversation and talk about yourself, because a great leader is a great listener. Of course, you might have to tell them a little bit about what's happening in the company, but make sure you do a really good bit of active listening with them, ask them some questions, use the funnel, trying to learn something new about everybody who works for you every time you talk to them.
Security
Introduction
Probably the most famous management theory in the world, ever, is Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs. He says that there are these needs that human beings have, and it starts with just having enough food and being warm enough. You got the physiological needs. The next level above, effectively the first one you come to in management, is security. And Maslow said that we have to have security before we can build on that and go on up to all the other things like challenge and interesting work and all the stuff that happens at the top. If people are insecure, it's going to be a problem. People are never going to be motivated if they don't feel secure. So how can we make our workforce, our team, feel secure?
Can fear be effective?
The inspirational leader knows that fear doesn't work as a motivator. All it does is make them feel insecure. And then they're always covering themselves. They can't relax. They can't take risks because if it goes wrong, they're going to be in trouble. They can't soar. They can't fly if they're just terrified of what's going to happen if they have a problem. People are less likely to take a risk if they might lose their bonus. Fear of things being taken away is more powerful than the motivation of getting that thing. Security, it is powerful. So, how do you make people feel more secure? And the first thing is to give them maximum information about the bigger picture. Tell them what's going on in the company. Otherwise, you'll just end up with lots of rumors. And the rumors will be mostly false rumors and mostly bad news.
What if they fail?
The inspirational leader gives people's support when they fail. This is an easy thing that you can do, and it sends a fantastic signal to people. Give people feedback on their performance whether it's good or bad. Everyone wants to know how am I doing, and saying nothing is scary. If somebody screws up, what do you say to them? The best thing to say to them is actually a question: "Do you know what you'll do differently next time?” The main thing is, it's always going to be good from now on. But sometimes they'll say, "No, I don't know what to do differently because I think I did everything right, and it just didn't work. I did the right thing with the customer, and we just didn't get the order.". So then, you'd need to go into coaching mode, and say to them, "Okay, well look, next time you get one of these, let me know, and I will work with you, and I'll show you what to do. It will be my fault if it doesn't work." And in fact, you could even go one step further. If somebody makes a mistake, you could say, "It's my fault that you didn't know how to do it."  You must be supportive if there's a problem. And after that, you can say, "I know you can do it." Because that's what we want to hear, isn't it? "I'm going to help you, I'm going to teach you, I know you can learn this. I know you can do it." And then they will want to prove to you that your faith in them is justified. They'll want to prove to themselves that they can do it, but they'll also want to prove to you. So, if I fail on something, I really want to have another go. I really want to show that I can do it. So, it's a really powerful thing to say to somebody. If something goes wrong, it's a learning experience. The person has hopefully learnt from it, but so has the organization really because we can make sure that nobody else makes that same mistake.
Consistency builds trust
The Inspirational Leader is consistent. Most people have probably never even thought about it, but what we want is for our boss, our leader, to be the same every day. I think there's a certain weakness in being variable. And it worries us if our leader is variable. If you don't know how they're going to react, it's scary. Is he in a good mood or a bad mood today? You know, we don't want to have to deal with that. If things have gone wrong and there's been some problems, we want the leader to still be positive and to still have the vision. And never lie. Because if you lie just once and you get caught, that's enough to ruin everything. And people will know if you lie. Now sometimes you can't tell people everything. And it might be confidentiality reasons, commercial reasons why you can't tell them. But even then, I think you can be honest about not being able to answer questions.
Always be fair
The inspirational leader is fair with everyone. But fairness is quite tricky. E.g.: You should push each person equally, but some can go further than others. So really capable person might need to be pushed a bit harder than somebody who's struggling. And fairness is the amount you push them not the amount we expect them to do. And similarly, giving each person the amount of support that they need. Some people need more support than others. And it's not unfair to give more support to the person who needs more support, but fairness would be giving each person the right amount of support that they need. And I would expect a high amount of effort from everyone. You might get different levels of results from different people, but I would expect them all to put in the same amount of effort. You should have absolutely the same rules for everyone. Everybody's got a reason to bend the rules. So those basic rules are things like timekeeping and safety and sickness and those sorts of rules, have to be the same for everybody. And you've got to be fair, and you can't start letting people off for reasons there. And you should have the same level of caring for everybody. Now, this is difficult, because there are going to be people who you like and people who you don't like for personality reasons and things. But you've got to try to force yourself to care equally for everybody. And you should spend equal attention on all the people that work for you. This is the amount of time you spend with them, and the amount of communication that you give them, that should be equal for everybody.
Build them up
Make people feel important
The inspirational leader makes people feel important because they are important. But it's important for them to realize that you know they're important, you feel they're important. You have to tell them, you have to show them. There are various ways that you can show people how they contribute to the overall success of the organization. One easy way is to have some sort of plan for what you're doing, where everyone can see their part of the plan (e.g.: a Gantt chart). Another way is to tell people the weekly numbers of how the organization's getting on, to show them the progress, to show them we're getting there. And you can show them how they have played a part in achieving those numbers. And then another way is just to tell them that they matter, to physically say, what you're doing is really important. And you can also show them that they matter by investing in training them. Training increases people's sense of security as well as their sense of importance. Another thing you can do is to take them to see the customer, take them to see your product being used by the customer. Finally, you can involve them in your decisions, in your problem solving. You'll probably get a better answer anyway and they will feel more buy-in, they'll be keener to implement the plan that you come up with. Involve them as much as you can in what you're doing.
Thank people
The Inspirational Leader, thanks people. Once a week, you should thank everyone who works for you. It should be for something significant, something good that they've done, something real. You should say, "By the way, I noticed you stayed on late "and sorted that problem out. "And thanks for doing that." It's easy to find something to criticize. But it takes real strength to say, "I really appreciate what you did. "I think it's brilliant. "Thanks for doing it." That takes a bit of strength, that's a skill. One way you can thank people, or you can show that you're grateful to them, is just to spend time with them. And that makes them feel more important. And when you do thank people, so are thinking about your body language. Getting shoulder to shoulder and shaking hands is another form of touching people. If someone's done something really good, I think you absolutely should say, "Well done for doing that. "That was fantastic." And shake their hand. It gives much more impact to the thanking if you do that. Another way of thanking people is to make sure that if somebody else sends in a thank you letter about one of your staff, stick it on the wall. Another way is to give them recognition for something like long service. Finally, you can hold ceremonies. Why not have some announcements of, "This is the person who has done best in this area”. You can have lots of categories. So, lots of people get to win a prize, and they can all come across the stage and be given a bottle of wine or something like that.
Everyone makes a difference: Jack's story
The inspirational leader finds something good in everyone. Because everyone makes a difference in one way or another. It can be difficult to make somebody feel important if the job they do is quite routine, quite mundane and there aren't any moments where they do something great. There might not even be anything you can really thank them for apart from consistency. So, what can you do? And I would like to suggest, you can always find something good that you can tell somebody that they've done.
Interesting work
The inspirational leader gives people interesting work. It's better for them. It's better for you. Everybody gains. So how can we get this to happen more? And the first thing is training people. We must never think, well, they're not capable of doing interesting work, because they don't know how. You might want to even give them a learning pathway. And then you give people challenges. If somebody's skill level is at six, they can't go straight to 10, but you just start giving them jobs at seven. And you don't give them every job at seven because that's too hard work. That's going to wear them out. If they're at six, give them mostly sixes, a few fives that are nice and easy, but the occasional seven so they gradually move up and they become six and seven. Then you can start giving them eight. You just keep moving them up by giving them challenges. Another way you can do this is job rotation. Moving people around and letting them try, giving them perhaps a secondment for a week in another department. It costs money, but it's quite motivational, because they're always learning and they can apply what they learn back into their own job. It's also a good idea to have a skills matrix. So you think what are all the skills we want people to have in this area, and then what are all the names, and then you can just tick who's good at what or even have scores for the level of skill in each area. And then you can make sure that each person is moving their skills up, but also that a particular skill is covered by more than one person. So, it'd be interesting to draw up a skills matrix. Two other things. Delegating some of your work to other people is a great way to give them more interesting work, and it saves you time, so everybody wins. It'd be interesting to think what parts of my job could I delegate, and perhaps if I was away, if I was ill, off sick or injured or something, who would do those things? And whoever would have to step up and somehow cope, give it to them. Maybe give them some training if necessary, or give it to them and help them, coach them, work with them. And finally, let them suggest what they would like to learn. Let them suggest new challenges that they would like to go for.
Delegation
Advantages of delegation
So the inspirational leader understands the advantages of delegation. If you delegate something to somebody else, it's probably going to be a challenge for them, and that's good because it feels good for them to achieve it. Another advantage is growth, because they're learning all the time. And it frees up more time for you, so that you can then grow as well. And you might have to coach them and help them a little bit, but that's all part of the process of growing the people who work for you. And in fact, it might prevent them leaving. If you're delegating more and more, they're gradually moving up anyway. So, there's a feeling of progress they'll have, and if it stops them leaving. It's also cheaper if you delegate, because the cost of the people who work for you is lower than the cost of your time. And, of course, it frees your time up massively, so you've got more time to do other things. It gives you time to think, and plan, and improve systems, and all the things that you're supposed to be doing.  If you delegate, it might be a task that you don't particularly love, but they might enjoy it more than you do, and they might even do it better than you.
Delegate as much as you
The inspirational leader, delegates as much as they can. It's easy to delegate small stuff. But delegating a big, important thing to somebody and not being certain that they can do it, take courage. But it's okay, because you can monitor. You can be there to check that they're okay. You can have a meeting with them every day if you like to check that they're all right. You can say to them, "Bring me a plan "of how you're going to do this." So you can check the plan, make sure the plans all right. And then you need to trust them to get on with it. If nobody who can do it, then you've got to do it yourself. So, as you do that job yourself, you should be thinking, "Next time, "I'm going to delegate this to somebody else. "Who can I train up? "How can I make sure that somebody else "does this next time?" You might even want to get them to work with you on it as you do it so that next time you can give it to them. But there is a third order which I think might be the best of all, which is delegate now, do it yourself. Now what about if the people you're thinking of giving the job to will not do it quite as well as you? A good guide is, if they can do it 80% as well as you, give it to them. Because that last 20% is mostly in your mind. They're probably at 90, really, or even 99 or whatever. And even if it is not quite as good as you would have done it, that's still fine. It's still a result. Because you've had 100% of your time freed up to do something else more important and bigger. Finally, if you don't know the answer you have to delegate. But if you do know the answer, you should still delegate.
They can do it
The inspirational leader believes that they can do it. Ideally, you would believe in your team. And if you don't believe in your team, by the way, then you need to probably change your team. You need to have a group of people who you believe are capable of all sorts of fantastic things. And you need to tell them that you believe that they can do it.  And how do we find out what their potential is? Try giving him more and more and see what happens. And give him support, give him training and coaching, but give him more and more and see how much he can grow. And you can say to him, "Look, I want to give you more because I think you can do it." And it is amazing what people are capable of.  A good way to do this would be to make a list of all the things that you can delegate and all the things that you can't and then delegate both. Now obviously, all the things you can delegate why are you not already delegating them? It might be that your people are a bit busy or whatever. So, you might have to gradually feed them stuff or employ an extra person What about the things that you can't? Well start thinking about how you could delegate them. What would be needed to delegate the things that you can't now delegate. One way would be to delegate at least part of it. You could also start training up a deputy and each of those areas of your job, train somebody else up to be able to do it as well.  If you're going to delegate something big, remember, there's two parts to this. There's the planning and the doing. You could delegate the planning, they decide how to do it, but then when they do it, you keep a real close eye. Or you could work with them very closely on the planning, agree the plan, so you're happy with it, and then delegate the doing so they can just get on and do it because you've agreed the plan.
Levels of freedom
The Inspirational Leader takes risks to get people to a point where they can delegate to them. Because initially, people aren't ready to be delegated to. So, the game is to push them up the freedom ladder. There are five steps we're going to go up. And the first step, is wait until told. People just sit there, and you tell them to do stuff and after they've done it, they just stop again. Not really great to have people there. The next level up is where they start to ask what next. "What do you want me to do next?" They're starting to be motivated; they've realized they're part of things, they can make difference. You want to get people to ask what next by showing that they're important and that they can make a difference. Then, the third level is where they suggest ideas, "Would you like me to do this for you?". Clearly, it's much better that ask what next, or wait to be told. The fourth box is report afterwards. So this is where they don't have to check first, they can just do it, but they're going to tell you what they've done, "Just to let you know, I've been to see the customer. So, you still know what's going on. In a way, this is where delegating is because you're monitoring. The final level is above delegating, and this is where they're free to act. There's no monitoring, they just do it. And this is empowerment. There might be some routine monitoring, there might be a or something like that, but you don't know the everyday details of how they're doing their job, they're just doing it. If you can get them to there, it's motivational for them. And it's also great for you, because you don't have to spend time telling them what to do, or checking on them. You can get on with bigger things. With a great leader, the team say, "We did it ourselves." And they actually did do it themselves. The leader just let them get on with it. The leader made it possible for them to get on and do it themselves. Ideally, you would delegate the fun stuff as well as the stuff you don't like. You would delegate what's best for the person, not best for you.
Being a great coach
The inspirational leader is a great coach, because the objective is to build a team of people who are better than you. You want to be constantly raising up your team. So coaching is an important skill for a leader. So, how do we coach somebody? The first thing is to divide the task up into the bits that they're going to learn. You divide it up into steps and you explain and agree, the coaching journey, the learning journey that the person's going to be taken on. So, what you do is, there are kind of five stages you go through for each part of the process. First, you show them how to do it. And then, you watch them doing it. And you watch them, and you just make sure they're doing it right. The next thing you do is, you can then leave them for a few minutes to do it. So, you start to just check on them every now and then. And you gradually get to a point where you only check occasionally. And then finally, you're not even there. You're available if they need to call you, if they get stuck. Finally, you would probably have a series of regular meetings where you see how they're getting on, and you want to agree how often those meetings are going to be. If your organization is large and you don't have enough time to coach everyone, you might want to have a system of mentors where everybody can have a mentor. I wouldn't make it compulsory, people can volunteer to be mentors, and then everybody can have the option of having a mentor. And their mentor wouldn't be their line manager. It needs to be somebody else diagonally across in the organization, who people can go to every now and then, just to talk about, are you happy? What are your career plans? You know, what do you want to do in the future? Any particular issues?
Are you brave enough?
The inspirational leader risks going all the way to empowerment. Empowerment means no monitoring, but you're still available for support. The one rule of empowerment is, if they have a problem, they must come to you, because you won't know because you're not monitoring. So, empowerment is different to delegation because delegation involves monitoring. It is about trust.  If you're going to be a great leader, people have got to have ownership, they've got to believe that the company is theirs. And that's what empowerment does.
Focus on people, not tasks
Building a machine of people
The inspirational leader sees their role as building a machine of people. It's people connected by processes. And the leader's job is to look at that and think that bit there isn't really working very well. Is it the person? Or is something falling between the cracks? Is it the way they work together? Maybe they don't get on, is communication not good enough? So just always thinking about the machine itself. So not getting in and thinking I'll do that job it needs doing. But to think why is that not being done? How do I improve the machine so that gets done? If you can get the machine of people working well, then the tasks will look after themselves. Your job is to think about the machine and a large part of that is coaching, making sure that the people within the machine are as good as they can be. And then, there's how they link together.
E.g.: there is overlap between person A and person B. They both think that they're in charge of that part of the job. And that's a problem. Because if they're both responsible for it, then either they're going to argue or they're going to keep changing the way it's done when the other person is not there. Or they'll think oh, the other person's doing it, and then they won't do it. Everything should be down to just one person. The second problem, you can probably see how one of the people their responsibility goes outside the rectangle. So, something that they are doing is not for you, it's for another manager. And that's going to be a problem because that person now has two bosses. So either that little bit needs to be cut off and given to somebody else who works for that other manager, or your empire needs to be expanded slightly to cover that bit as well. But you shouldn't have people who work for you, doing things that some other manager is responsible for. That's just messy. The third problem is the people who work for you are covering various things, but there's some stuff that nobody covers, so you have to do it. And there shouldn't be anything that only you are looking after, because you should have delegated everything. So, the key is to think about people's job roles so that they cover everything. And of course, in real life it's worse than this, because people leave and get replaced by another one, get bored, etc. And that's a full-time job. But that's part of what you need to be doing if you going to be a great leader. And then you need contingency planning. There are several ways to do this. First of all, is skills matrix. If you've got at least two people to cover everything. If somebody else leaves, then you're definitely going to still be okay. So, you want to make sure you got people trained up. If there's only one person who can do something that's risky. You need to train up somebody else. Then there's succession planning. Who could step up if needed? If somebody left who, probably somebody who works for them, but it might not be, who could move up into that job. And you always need to have at least one person able to step up into any job if something happened to that person. If they left or became ill or got promoted. And finally, career planning. You should give the option of talking about career planning. What's the next step for them? And when do they want to make that step? And then you can think about, what's needed first? What sort of training do they need? What sort of experience do they need? How are we going to give them that, so they can make that step up?
Motivation audit in your head
The inspirational leader does a motivational audit in their head every month. About once a month you stand back and you think, are my people happy? You don't want to wait till suddenly somebody leaves, that's too late. You want to make sure they're happy all the time. There are seven things that you can ask yourself about your people. 1. Are they happy? 2. Do they have ownership of something, just something that's theirs. 3. Have you thanked them recently. 4. Have they got a challenge that they're working on? Is there something that's a little bit above their level of competence, that they're finding difficult, but which, when they end up succeeding, will make them feel great. 5. We've got other any omissions? Are there any gaps in their skills, and what's their next area of development going to be? What are they not so good at that they might need a bit of coaching or training on? 6. Learning, are they still learning in that job? 7. Don't let them get bored. So, is there anybody working for you, who starting to get bored?
Every good company does this
The inspirational leader always does appraisals. They are vital because they solve every problem you might have between a boss and the person who works for them. Great bosses always do appraisals. Just do yours really well and lead by example. Make sure that you always do your appraisal, make a real effort to do them well. Ideally, you want your managers to do appraisals as well. Always make sure that you do them and explain to people why you do them, explain to people how important they are. Finally, it is key to make a summary list of all the agreed improvement areas.
Are they a team?
The inspirational leader builds a great team. Always have a weekly meeting with your team, sit around a table and actually talk about stuff. Also have some social events outside work. Some people don't like different types of event. But if you can have a variety of social events so there's always something for everybody, then that does build teams. Ideally, you'd have a working environment that encourages a team atmosphere. So, you could have a nice area where people could sit and have coffee, for example. It just makes people a little bit more just feeling like they're at home or relaxed, a feeling of belonging. At least have a nice meal room where people can go and chat when they have their break. You can also give people team objectives. Rather than individual objectives, where they could decide how they do it. And you can give them team challenges. You can also give them empowerment within the team. "Here's the bonus that we've earned this year or this month. You can decide how you divide it amongst yourselves." Empowerment within the team is a way to strengthen the team. But you have to prepared to intervene if there's a problem. If someone doesn't fit in the team, then you have to take that person out of the team.
Problems
Keeping positive
The inspirational leader always remains positive and doesn't whinge about what happened. If something goes wrong, don't blame the person. They didn't deliberately do it wrong. It just went wrong for some reason. Instead, ask why, why did it go wrong? How are we going to fix it for next time and the reason things go wrong are always either people or systems. It's either the person wasn't trained or didn't know how, or the system didn't work. If you just think why are they doing it, you can get to the root of it and you can fix it. No point in blaming the people. Problems involving people are always either their attitude or their ability. And so the question is to work out which one is it, is it their attitude isn't very good, and they're not motivated? Which is management's fault. Or is it that their ability isn't very good, and they're not trained and skilled, which is management's fault. They're always just victims of the system either way, and in the end, everything's management's fault. And even if somebody is utterly terrible and useless, which is pretty rare, it's still management's fault for giving them the job. So unfortunately, you can't get away from the fact that everything's management's fault. If you're the leader, everything is your fault, but that's okay. Because then you can think, right, how do I fix it?
Having the big view
The inspirational leader always thinks about how to prevent a repeat. The game is to deal with the problem, but also to think what is the root cause of this? We should calmly investigate. And there's a technique called the five why's, where you ask why approximately five times. It might even be three or it might be seven, but the idea is you say, "Why did this happen?" "Why did we run out of parts?" And they say, "Well, because the machine broke down." "But why did the machine break down?" "Because it's really unreliable." "Well, why have we got an unreliable machine?" Until you get to the root cause. And quite often, you find that in the end it's the fact that somebody isn't trained or we haven't spent any money on the system or that management don't give it any attention or whatever. And so usually, the finger comes around and points back at management.
Number one motto: EMF
The inspirational leader takes ownership of problems. There's a thing called seagull management, which is where you monitor but you don't support. Seagull managers come flapping in making lots of noise, poo all over everyone and fly away again. If you have an environment where people are going to be blamed and perhaps even fired, they'll all just blame each other, and nobody will take ownership of the problems. They're almost preparing who they're going to point the finger at if it goes wrong. It's almost good if they can spot someone doing something bad. That's a terrible way to work. If somebody is not doing a good job, that person either hasn't been trained or they don't understand the importance of it, or you've given the job to the wrong person or you didn't brief them properly, in the end everything's management's fault. You must think, okay, it's my fault. The question is, what must I do differently to prevent a repeat?
Managing your boss
The inspirational leader manages upwards assertively. So, if your boss makes it hard for you to be a great manager or a great leader, then you must fight upwards, and that takes a bit of courage but it's important. For example, if you're going to be a great communicator, you have to get the information to communicate, and then, you have to get permission to communicate it. And if your boss doesn't really want you to be a great communicator, you may have to fight with your boss a bit to do that. And similarly, if you want to empower your people, then you need to get permission from your boss, you need to get them to empower you, or certainly get permission from your boss to empower your people. There's an element of pushing back upwards if you're going to be an inspirational leader, because you're the one doing it, and you can't let these people start to tell you how to do it. If you're a real good leader, you'll defend your team and you'll look after your team, and you'll shelter them from the poo. Now one more thing you might want to get your boss to do, is do a bit more management by wandering about. You'll get the boss to come in, because you're keen to show the boss how great your area is. And then, when you need to ask the boss for investment or changes, they will understand. You need the boss to be on your side, it needs to be you and the boss running your area, really.
Difficult situations
"You can't do my job"
The inspirational leader admits that they don't know everything. It's better to be honest and admit that you don't know everything. As you get promoted up, you inherit whole other areas, which have nothing to do with you. So, you don't know how to do everybody's job, but that's fine because that's what they get paid for, and that's what we trust them to do. And they would rather that you were allowed to get on with it and not be interfered with.
"Why are you paid more than me?"
The inspirational leader explains what they're trying to do and why it's difficult, because a lot of managers and leaders don't tell people what they're doing, they think it's secret, or they think it's not worth it, or they don't have enough time. Whatever reason, they don't tell their team what they're working on, and so their team start thinking that their leader doesn't do anything. We sort of vaguely know that what our bosses do must be difficult, because we sort of think it's probably quite stressful and we know that it's well paid, so it must be difficult. Now, you know why are managers paid more? Because it's a tougher job. It must be more difficult because companies will always employ the cheapest person they can get who can do the job, and they have to pay quite a lot of money to get people to do that job. Because it's a difficult job, it's hard to get people who will do it. There's a duty on every leader to communicate what's difficult about their job to their team. Tell people what you're working on each week, but why not publicize that in a bigger way as well? You know, why not tell the whole company what your projects are, that you're trying to do?
Personality colors
The inspirational leader works on their own weaknesses. They're constantly trying to improve themselves. If you're a leader, you've got to be perfect or you've got to try to be as perfect as you can. It's not acceptable if you're a leader just to say, well, I've got a bit of a short temper. It's how I am. You've got to work on that. And I'd like to suggest a few possible weaknesses that you might want to think about. If you've got any of these, you need to work on them. There's a model of personality which is the four types of people.
We've got the introvert quiet people on the left, and we've got the more chatty people on the right. And then the top two are the logic fact-based type people. And the bottom two are more emotional, more people based, they're more ruled by their heart than their head. We've got the analytical, these are the logical systematic people. We tend to think of engineers and accountants as being analytical, they're not always, of course, although they quite often are. If you're one of these people sometimes called blue people as well, I think the weaknesses to consider are courage. Are you brave enough? Because analytical people always have reasons why it's a bad idea to do something. And similarly, are you decisive enough? You don't want to spend too long, weighing up all the pros and cons. You've got to make decisions. It's nothing worse than a leader who won't decide. Then there's warmth and enthusiasm. Quite often, blue people are very fact-based of well. And ideally, you'd be a bit warmer towards the people and a bit more enthusiastic. So, if you're a blue person and you want to be a great leader, you got to work on your enthusiasm.
Now going across to the red people, top right. These are the controllers. You probably need to work on being patient with other people. They're not all as fast as you. They're not all as clever as you. So, work on your patience, calmness and work on empathy. Think about how will this person feel when I give him this big challenge. How will they feel when I tell them they're useless. Let people learn through their mistakes rather than just telling them they're no good or not even risking people have to make mistakes.
Going down to the bottom right, the enthusiast, often called a yellow, they perhaps could be a better leader is explaining the detail to the blue people. The yellow people, when they're dealing with a blue, they often think, well, just do it. Here's the big picture let's go. And the blue people are like, no, I need to know every detail before I start. So, to slow down a bit and explain the details to the blue people is an important leadership quality that the yellow people need to learn. Also, try to be the same every day. Yellow people often have ups and downs and moods. And don't frighten people with a massive, great, big leap of, we're going to be totally different starting next week. The blue and the green people will be frightened by that. So, you want to help them through by showing them how we're going to do it. We've got a plan; we'll do it one step at a time. It's going to be fine.
Finally, the green person, the amiable. Often people underestimate the greens. They think, oh, they're not tough enough to be a boss, but they’re good with people. And they think a lot and they notice, and they're good listeners, green people have a lot of strengths. This is the amiable, but what do they need to do to be a great leader? And I think first of all, to do those tough things, to make those tough decisions, because sometimes you have to do things that not everyone's going to like, so facing up to being unpopular, and detaching yourself from what people will think. Sometimes you must look at the task and just think, we're going to do this. That area is not profitable. We're going to cut it. Also, don't be biased by who you like and who you don't like. Even the people who you don't like, but they all have things to add. And don't worry about whether people like you because I think it's impossible to be a really great leader and be liked by everyone. You can be respected as fair. That's probably the most you can hope for. But if you start really worrying about whether people are going to like you or not, that's going to compromise your decision making. But green people are brilliant with relationships. So that's a real strength they've got. The only other thing they could probably develop is to hurry up sometimes because they like to really get to know people and build a big relationship with them. And whilst that's brilliant, sometimes they would have to just go and get the facts and decide. Think about what colour you are, what potential weaknesses you might have. You may even want to get feedback from colleagues and then think, how am I going to work on my weaknesses? How can I move towards trying to be perfect?
Handling bad people
The inspirational leader is decisive with bad people. What should a great leader do if they've got someone who works for them who is just not performing? Give them a few chances and if that doesn't work, then out they go. You've got to be able to show that you're giving them a chance legally, and you should anyway. So, give them a chance and see what will happen. If you don't do something about an under-performer, everyone else in the team is looking and thinking, "Well, you know, that person's getting away with turning up late, that person's always sick on a Monday, that person always delivers their stuff half finished, they're getting away with it, why am I bothering?" So, it starts to become a real de-motivator for the rest of the team. So, you must do something about it and the others will expect you to. If you do end up setting someone free, they'll probably find a more suitable job where they'll be happier, because somewhere out there is the ideal job for them. But also, somebody else can come in and have that job, and there's probably somebody good out there who would love to do that job that that person currently is just doing badly and doesn't care about. So, set them free, so that somebody else can come in and have that job. And once you've done that, you can end up with a really great team, and that's the objective of course, to have a fantastic performing team.
Ruthless about mediocracy
The Inspiration Leader is ruthless to build a great team. More than just decisive, they've got to be actually be quite tough on people. But building a great team is so important. So clearly you got to get rid of the bad people. But what about the 40% who are okay? And I would have said before I had a particular experience, that if somebody's 40%, that's all right. Just get rid of the really bad ones. if you've got the power to do this, get rid of those people. Set them free, and replace them by somebody inspirational. And I think that's one of the things Inspirational Leaders do. They build a really fantastic team.
Does money motivate?
The inspirational leader doesn't use money as a motivator. The thing about money is it makes people do things, but it doesn't make them want to do things. If you want someone to do something well, money is not going to do that. Technically money is described as a hygiene factor, so if you pay someone too little, it will demotivate them, but if you pay them a lot more, you won't get any more out of them. So, if we feel we're getting paid less than somebody else, that is a real problem. In fact, you should pay people slightly over the going rate because if you do that, money's not going to be a problem hygiene is taken care of. And they're going to stay for longer, which saves you time and money in terms of turnover of staff. But also, you can pick and choose the best people if you pay slightly over the going rate. The rule number one of management never mess with people's money. But remember that going beyond that basic hygiene, paying extra is not going to get extra performance from people, It's not. All it does, is it distorts people's focus. So if you say, "If you do this, there'll be a bonus," yeah, they'll do it, but they'll ignore everything else, they'll just become obsessed with the one thing that's being measured and linked to their pay. And it pushes out things like caring, caring about quality, caring about the customer. You start thinking, "Well, I just do what earns the most money, "I'll sell them the thing that gets me the biggest bonus." So, you got to be really careful when you start using money as a way to make people do stuff. They should do it because they believe in it. The inspirational leader makes people believe in what they're doing. And money does the reverse of that, does the opposite. It makes you do it, but not care about how you do it or the fact that you're doing it. Instead of a bonus, I think it's better to promote the best people because what that leads to is that the better people move up to higher paying jobs, and then they end up getting more money because they've been promoted, but it should be based on performance, which leads to money, but it's not about the money.

--- LL Courses Week 7 - Content.docx ---
LinkedIn Learning Courses – Week 6
Key Takeaways
Contents
Week 5. Managing Performance2
Having difficult conversations. A guide for managers2
A toolkit for giving and receiving better feedback9
Coaching and developing employees12
Week 5. Managing Performance
Having difficult conversations. A guide for managers
Understanding and overcoming conversation barriers
Your conversation style
On a scale of one to 10 with 10 being extremely confident, how confident are you that you can initiate a difficult conversation that gets results? Often, new managers rate themselves high, and seasoned managers rate themselves low. But both operate from the two sides of the same coin, dysfunction. Let's explore two dysfunctional styles that trip up new and seasoned leaders. All of us have blind spots and opportunities to grow. The first dysfunctional communication style is what I like to call the avoider. Avoiders admit that they hate confrontation, so they procrastinate. Sometimes avoiders use damage control tactics like moving the problem employee to another location, pretending to agree to make the other person happy, or providing favours to keep the peace, anything to avoid the conversation that needs to happen. But there's a high cost to avoidance. Sometimes the result is absenteeism or turnover, or just poor productivity or even a lawsuit. Now let's look at the aggressor. Aggressors don't fear initiating conversations. Often new managers come to a leadership position without the right skills and mindsets they need to enable them to get results and change performance. As a result, they contribute to turnover, absenteeism, and a lack of engagement. Aggressors often overestimate their leadership skills and underestimate the negative impact. So, do you identify more with the avoider or the aggressor?
Overcome the main barrier to difficult conversations
There are hundreds of reasons we avoid difficult conversations, but let's explore the two major barriers that contribute to avoidance. The first barrier is fear of emotions. A lot of leaders are afraid that their employee might cry, be defensive, get angry. It's the fear of the other person's reaction. The real barrier is about your own feelings and emotion. You don't like how you feel when the other person reacts. So how do you overcome the biggest barrier, fear of emotions? Shift your mindset. Look at the conversation as an opportunity to expand your conflict capacity. Accept the fact that growth can be painful not only for your employees but also for you. Change your focus to fear of hurting feelings to the thrill of helping your employees improve. Now, mindset might give you the confidence but not the competence. You'll need a set of skills, and that's the second barrier that makes you avoid conversations, the feeling that you don't have the ability to initiate and navigate conversation successfully. For example, maybe you don't know how to start the conversation, especially if the situation has been going on for too long. Maybe you know that your employee is going to get upset and you don't know how to redirect when things get tense. But you can learn and practice these skills. Managers who overcome the two big barriers to initiating conversations rarely, if ever, need to fire anyone. The employee either improves or they leave on their own.
Difficult conversations as part of the job
How to know it's time for a conversation
If you address something before its time, you'll be seen as a micromanager. But keeping the peace for too long can create big problems later. So, you'll want to look out for signs that it's time for that difficult conversation. The first sign is your inner landscape, your thoughts, feelings, and emotions. When something takes up space in your head, it's time for a conversation. Another sign is unwanted business results. If profits are taking a dive or you're seeing more unwanted turnover or poor customer service reports. As a manager, it's your obligation to reach out and have that conversation. You can also look out for misalignment between the company's mission and the employees’ behaviour. For example, you might see employees focused on individual accomplishment when the mission is teamwork. The final sign is the easiest to spot: Complaining. Complaining is a sign that a conversation is being avoided.
Managing emotions
Often, it's our inability to manage emotions that gets in the way of successful conversations. Our emotions can override our good intentions. The word emotion means disturbance. So, managing your emotions is the key to successfully initiating and navigating through difficult conversations. Emotions come from the thought feeling loop. A thought triggers a feeling and the feeling triggers another thought. These thoughts become a way of thinking that influences managerial behaviour. But if you're ready to increase your conflict competency, you'll need a practical method to help you manage those emotions. The way you see others plus the way you see yourself, plus your intention equals your behaviours. Let's break it down. The way you see the other person affects your behaviour toward them. If you view someone as too sensitive, you're going to work harder to protect them than to correct them. And if you see someone as a hard driver, you'll be more tempted to avoid them because they intimidate you. So, here's what to do. Shift the way you see the other person. It's all a matter of perspective. See the sensitive person as capable of growth. And see your hard driver as a high energy person who can improve with coaching. Now let's explore the way you see yourself. Your self-definition is going to drive your behavior. How do you see yourself? If you struggle here, choose to start seeing yourself as a capable and caring leader. Now let's look at the power of intention. If your intention during a conversation is to save their feelings or make them like you, your conversation will take a wrong and dangerous turn. If you're intention is to show them who's boss, you're going to argue to make a point rather than coach them to understanding. Shift your intention to helping them grow. Encourage them to align their behaviours with the mission and the values of the organization, and your conversations will be productive.
How to address avoided issues
Suppose you're holding a meeting, and Paulo, your employee, sits there with arms crossed, apparently disengaged, except occasionally he rolls his eyes. Paulo's unwanted behaviour becomes the elephant in the room. That's an American idiom for a big problem that everyone sees but pretends isn't there. Every manager has an experience like this, and most managers I've talked with really don't know what to do. Three skills you can work on to address that elephant in the room: 1. State the observable behaviour the first time you see it whether that's in a team meeting or in a one-on-one. For example, Paulo's in a team meeting. Here's how to do it. Paulo, I noticed you just rolled your eyes. Pause. Paulo may decide to speak up, and if so, the skill worked for you. If he just sits there, then you can use the second skill, sharing perceptions. You're going to tell your employee how you're interpreting their behaviour. You could say something like I'm sensing that you disagree or have something to say. Keep your tone inquisitive yet neutral. Use words like I perceive or the story I'm telling myself. Most of the time you'll get a quick course correction, and Paulo's behavior will shift, but let's say that his eye rolling just happened for the third time, and you missed it again. You can still address the issue by inviting Paulo to talk to you privately but be prepared for him to become defensive. That's when you use the last skill, asking for change. This is where you ask your employee for the desired behaviour. During the last three meetings, I noticed you crossed your arms and rolled your eyes a couple of times. The story that's going through my head is that you either disagree or that you have something important to say that you haven't yet said. - I didn't mean to roll my eyes, but I still think the new policy is unfair. - I'm sorry you feel that way. I'd really like it if you could speak up when you disagree and be aware of your expressions. Can I get your agreement? - Yes, I can do that. - Great, because really what I want you to understand is that I value your input on this team. - You'll notice that Paulo was pretty receptive to his supervisor's coaching, and he'll probably pay attention to his behavior in the future, but of course, this isn't always what happens. Be prepared for some pushback or resistance, and remember to keep the conversation on track. Remind your employee that you are on their side.
Massive mistakes to avoid
Avoid online communication mistakes
You'll want to pay attention to how and when you communicate online and the most common mistakes to avoid. Online communications are useful for sending updates, factual information, invitations to meetings, the meeting agenda and changes to the schedule. In other words, information that helps everyone stay on the same page. But using email or text communication for long discussions, explaining, gossiping or arguing is a mistake. Wherever there are high stakes, or the potential for high emotion, schedule an in-person meeting or a phone call. Avoid communicating online when the topic is performance reviews, behavioral issues, discipline or misunderstandings.
Stop playing power of attorney
In the workplace, a common mistake is to allow one employee to speak on behalf of another. I call this playing power of attorney. Power of attorney is a lot like gossip. There's almost always more than one side to every story, especially when the story is about what everyone is saying. Here's the rule to remember. The one complaining is the one with the problem. Coach the one complaining. Do not try to fix the other person. If you want to create a responsible culture, don't allow power of attorney, and don't play power of attorney. If there's a problem employee, represent yourself but don't represent everyone else. Don't assume that everything you've heard is accurate. Make the conversation about what you've noticed. Set the example and address the issues head on.
Stop fixing and rescuing
Rescuing is taking on issues that don't belong to you, either emotionally, mentally, or physically. It's fixing situations rather than coaching employees to solve their own problems. Rescuing happens because the manager believes it's their job to make employees happy and they're all too happy to help. But there's a huge distinction between helping and rescuing. Helping is teaching. When you keep rescuing, you promote helplessness, and guess what? Eventually, you will feel resentful. Resentment is a good sign that you have been rescuing. The way you stop rescuing is to believe in the creative power of each employee. Here are three easy steps to help. First, notice their language. Does it sound powerless? Full of blame? Do they see themselves as helpless? Second, notice your trigger. What gets you so stirred up that you feel the need to jump in? Can you sit with that feeling for a while without jumping to a solution? Third, coach your employees. Help them to see the choices available to them instead of choosing a solution for them. See if you can help them feel empowered enough to take a positive action. Treat them like responsible adults and coach them to resolve their own conflicts instead of doing all the work for them. If your employees constantly complain, ask for favours, tell you sad stories about their troubles, or blame others, ask yourself if you're buying into a story about them being helpless. Then, catch yourself and decide not to rescue them.
Prevent getting distracted and losing control
Have you ever been in a middle of a conversation and wonder how you got off track? Ping-pong happens when you lose focus and get distracted from your stated intention. When you find yourself playing ping-pong, redirect immediately. If that doesn't happen, then take some time after the meeting. Ask yourself where you got distracted? What triggered the distraction? Did you set your intention at the beginning? Did you stay focused on the result? As you start to pay attention and practice, your conversations will become more focused.
Mindsets that expand complex competencies
Mindsets: Growth versus fixed
One of the most challenging tasks for many managers is giving honest feedback, and one of the most challenging parts of a job for many employees is receiving honest feedback. But there is one quality that makes all the difference in how you experience giving and receiving feedback. That quality is mindset. Dr. Carol Dweck, author of Mindset: The New Psychology of Success, writes about how mindset influences your thoughts and actions. Let's talk about the two types of mindsets, and how these shape your experience of giving and receiving feedback. The first type of mindset is the fixed mindset. If you believe that intelligence is unchangeable, then you have a fixed mindset. The second type of mindset is the growth mindset. You aren't worried about not being the best because you believe you can learn and improve on anything. With a growth mindset, you'll see behaviours like wanting to hear feedback, even when it's not glowing. A willingness to develop new skills, even when they're difficult, and pushing forward, even when you're challenged. Now, let's apply these mindsets to giving and receiving feedback as a boss and an employee by looking at this model.
An employee with the growth mindset wants your feedback, even if the feedback isn't rosy. If you're this employee's boss, and you also have a growth mindset, there's no problem. You know your employee can grow so you're happy to offer feedback and your employee's happy to learn from you. But, if your employee has a fixed mindset, no matter your intentions, they're going to feel defensive if you offer critical feedback. If both the manager and the employee have a fixed mindset, there is going to be some problems. The manager might not believe in training or development. When it comes to skill and intelligence, this manager believes you either have it or you don't. If you have a fixed mindset about yourself, you will likely have fixed ideas about your employees, and won't see their possibility for growth. How would an employee with a growth mindset feel if you never gave any feedback? As a manager, it's important to develop a growth mindset, and help employees do the same. Then, your conversations can be positive and productive.
Replace assumptions with curiosity
An assumption is when you're certain of something that may or may not be true. Sometimes you'll want to challenge your assumptions and use curiosity to start a conversation. When you feel strong emotions, you've probably made an assumption about motive, and when the assumption is about performance or motive, challenge it. There may be many reasons for poor performance. Your employee may like clarity about the task. Maybe they don't understand priorities, or it could be a resource or a training issue. We can never be certain of what's driving another person's behaviour. So, how do you overcome the tendency to make dangerous assumptions? The first step is awareness. Listen to your inner dialogue. What stories are you telling yourself? How can you be certain that what you assume is factual? Listen to others and see if you can find the assumptions they're making. Then, get curious, so you can either confirm or challenge your assumption. Your assumption may be correct, but it may be just a story going on in your own head. If there's real curiosity, you'll be able to solve your problem through a productive conversation.
Set the expectations from the start
Have you ever tried to help an employee improve but it backfired? They got defensive, they made excuses, or it hurt their feelings and they cried. It's not necessarily anyone's fault, it's just the way our brains work. Just talking with someone of higher status can trigger a stress response. But there's a magical solution to help employees seek feedback. 1. Set expectations from the start. Whether it's a new hire or a long-term employee, it's very important to set the expectation that you're a boss who offers feedback and performance improvement coaching, not just once a year, but on an ongoing basis. 2. Start a habit of using a one to ten scale for your conversations. "Day, on a scale of one to 10, with one being difficult "and 10 being extremely easy, how do you rate this task?" If Day says it's a six, then you can ask what two things might need to happen to bring it to an eight. This scale helps you to gain clarity and alignment. Finally, you can use the one to 10 scale as a more formal system of talking about mission, values, behaviours, and mindsets in your one-on-one meetings.
Mapping out difficult conversations
Initiating conversations can be difficult. But one thing that makes a conversation easier is to map out the conversation in advance. Here's a simple blueprint that you can use and it goes something like this: I'd like to talk about; the reason why is; what I've noticed; I perceive; what are your thoughts, or walk me through what's happening; what I need/want; would you be willing to. This is a conversation. You'll need to pause and listen, expect some interruptions and maybe a few excuses. But this blueprint makes conversations easier because you know where you are and where you're going and it's easier to stay in control. It doesn't guarantee that the other person is going to agree, but the purpose of the blueprint is to help you prepare in advance of the conversation, stay on track and ask for the desired change.
Discerning the real issue
Have you ever heard the statement "Things are rarely what they seem." You may think you understand a problem, only to realize later the problem was something entirely different. There are several things you can do to uncover the real problem. First, make a distinction between the presenting problem and the observable behaviours. The front line leaders complain about their employees but don't know how to initiate conversations or course correct their behavior. The second step is to initiate a conversation and find out the root cause instead of assuming. Third, listen for four areas: skill, clarity, priority, and resources. Many issues could have been resolved earlier with better communication. Remember nothing is ever what it seems. Real problems are usually more multi-faceted than presenting problems.
Listen to own the conversation
Listening is probably one of the most difficult skills to practice. It's an ongoing discipline that includes staying present and avoiding the temptation to multitask, interrupt, and argue. Listening is also about noticing nuances in body language or facial expressions, and it's about asking relevant questions. But in highly charged difficult conversations, listening is not enough, you need radical listening. Radical listening is the ability to own the conversation by controlling your emotional urges when you don't like what you're hearing. And most of us need a lot of practice. Think about your own urges when strong emotions are stirred up. Do you roll your eyes? Raise your voice? Do you get irritated at their misinformation? Do you use facts to prove your point? Do you try to win at all costs? Do you avoid? Not if you're a radical listener. That's because the one who listens first owns the conversation and doesn't respond based on emotion. When you listen first and the other person feels truly heard, they're often willing to listen to you in return. And that's often what we're after in a difficult conversation. Here are some guidelines for radical listening. When something triggers you, build some space between stimulus and response. Take a deep breath. Welcome the silence. Next, simply acknowledge their reality. You don't have to agree, just say something like I see, or I hear you or, that's interesting. Then build another space. Don't speak yet. Give them more room to expand. Say something like I didn't know you felt that way or simply use curiosity without judgment by saying say more about that. Stay silent but attentive being mindful of your expressions until they start to wind down. Until someone feels heard, they won't consider another point of view. They'll feel threatened, they'll argue, withdraw, and they'll make you wrong. But notice the shift in them once they feel heard. They'll seem more open to consider other viewpoints. Either they will invite you to share your point of view or they won't. But you control when to share. When you talk you know what you know. But when you listen, you know what you know, and you know what they know. Radical listening builds bridges and helps you control the direction of difficult conversations.
Create a fresh start
Let's talk about some clear steps you can take when you've let the problem go on too long and what you can do to get a fresh start. Before taking any action, look at the company policy. Then, there are several steps you'll want to follow. Suppose your employees are clocking in and then going across the street for coffee. Let's suppose you've decided you want to change a behavior so you started by gathering everyone in a room. Now here's an example of how it might sound. "I want to thank all of you for attending this meeting, "we're here to talk about tightening up our starting time. "I've noticed a habit of clocking in "and going across the street for coffee, "what's been happening is that the conversations get lively "and then we start showing up sometimes half an hour late "while we're already on the clock. "Now I'm not here to call anyone out, "in fact, part of this is my fault. "I've noticed it, I've allowed it, "I didn't enforce the policy. "And this is partly because I appreciate the comradery "we have here and the culture we've created. "However, we need to make a shift. "It's fine to go for coffee together "and I hope you continue that "but you're going to need to attend to personal business "before clocking in. "Meet anytime you want but if you're on the clock, "you're expected to be at your work stations." Does that make sense? Since you've owned part of the problem, most people will not feel threatened and they'll agree. But before you allow everybody to go back to work, you have to let them know that you're serious. So you finish my saying, "Great, just to be clear, "if anyone starts late, their time will be docked. "Now as far as I'm concerned, we're now on the same page "and we're making a fresh start." Owning the part you played is essential if you want to minimize negativity and maximize your chances of creating a fresh start.
Making tough calls
Create a culture of accountability
When nothing changes after a conversation, it's usually an accountability issue. How can we create a culture of accountability to improve performance and shift behavior? Accountability and responsibility go together in creating a culture of accountability, but it's easier when you understand their individual components. Accountability is about measurement and numbers. I think of accountability as being logical, and not emotional. It's about the head, while responsibility is about ownership, more emotional, and therefore it's more about the heart. To create a culture of accountability, the head and the heart must work together. When employees really enjoy their work, and they want to achieve, they crave this accountability. They want feedback from the boss. They want to be noticed when they do a good job. They want new tips and skills when they miss the mark. Accountability is a manager's best friend when used properly. You can measure progress, you can keep track of goals, and you can use accountability to course correct behaviours or skills and also to change expectations. You can also force accountability, because you have the authority. If there's a lack of accountability, first, become crystal clear about the desired change you need to see, and the support you may need to give to your employee. Next, schedule a one on one meeting with the employee to talk about the desired changes. Answer any questions and clarify measurable expectations. Before you conclude the meeting, schedule an agreed upon time to meet again to check progress. Finally, articulate what the next steps or consequences will be if improvement is not achieved. That's what we mean by holding someone accountable. Accountability is not meant to punish, but to guide, instruct, and support.
Making good decisions
For any area where you think you need some practice, here's a suggestion on how to make this training work for you. Pick one area where you feel that you know about the subject, but you still aren't consistent. Then make an effort to practice a particular skill every day for two weeks. If possible, get an accountability partner who also wants to work on a skill. You can even keep a journal to document the distinctions and the a-ha's, or record how much you've learned and executed. Self-study takes discipline and motivation, but in the end it's simply a decision to excel. Because of your own growth mindset, you'll be a great role model for employees who may need some encouragement to shift from a fixed mindset.
A toolkit for giving and receiving better feedback
Robert Kaplan: Coach your people toward alignment
Coaching is one of the key ways you align your organization to the vision and priorities. Coaching means you identify one or two weaknesses, usually skill related that you would like a person to improve upon which ideally will manifest themselves, the improvements in their actions. I mention two or three things or one or two things that I think you should do better. Ideally then I give you some suggestions on how to do them better and I hopefully follow up a month later or two months later and talk about how it is going and make any course adjustments. To do that, coaching requires direct observation of the subject. Either I directly observe you or I interview people who directly observe you. We all have blind spots. I don't see myself accurately. None of us do completely. Make sure you do it during the year, well in advance of the year-end review. I've never seen anybody quit yet because I coached them too much during the year but I've seen a lot of people quit because I surprised them in the year-end review after it was too late to do anything about it and they really wanted that promotion or they wanted a certain compensation and they were surprised and then they just, they don't trust you anymore. Make sure you do it months in advance, so you give people a chance to improve. If you don't have time to coach your direct reports, you got too many direct reports. The bigger problem in that senior people think it's okay not to have a coach. Every senior person, anybody who manages someone, you are completely responsible for going out and getting a coach. People underestimate the power asymmetry that exists between them and the people who report to them. If you have people reporting to you, they see you as all powerful, you control their lives, you set their compensation. If they have future aspirations in their career, you're the person they're reliant on. You have all the power. So, you've got to ask them for advice. And you will improve, you'll take action, you'll improve, and you'll get better because almost invariably when people know what they need to improve on, they do get better. This engages your people. It makes you look strong. It is not a weakness to ask a question or seek advice.
Michelle Lederman: Building relationships through likability
Because feedback is only effective if somebody can receive it, you want to present feedback on a silver platter. So, if you think about the most important Law of Likability, it's the Law of Curiosity. And I have a model that you can walk through any challenging or feedback conversation that will leverage these Laws of Likability, starting with Curiosity. Curiosity creates connections. And connection is important in these conversations because, when you are receiving feedback, you are considering your source. And when you don't value, trust, or like the source then you might not be really willing to take that information in. So, the model is four parts. Ask, elaborate, empower, collaborate. Ask is going to leverage that Law of Curiosity. Start with an open-ended question. It's not, do you think that went well? Which is implying that you don't think that went well. Instead you ask, how do you think it went? What do you think went well? What do you think could have gone better? And get them talking. The key to opening a feedback conversation is to get the information from them. When you ask, the next Law of Likability is the most important thing: You must listen. Listen for the understanding, for the concern, for a different view or interpretation of the situation. Because we know we're coming in with a belief about that happened. We need to try to check that assumption at the door and listen for other possibilities, other narratives. We've asked, we've listened. Now it's your turn as the manager to elaborate. This is your chance to add information that you might have heard, collected from other sources. Don't say, well I heard... Instead you'll say, additionally I received information from so and so and this and that and you're... My perspective of... And it could be elevating them. Feedback isn't always negative. Feedback is simply information that you want to make somebody able to use and put into action. So that is the first half of the conversation. Before you move onto the second half, what I want you to think about root causes. What are the root causes and the reasons that it went so well? What are the root causes and the reasons that it didn't go so well? Is there something that's underlying that can help us in the second half of this conversation where we're looking for the solutions? Did you not have training? Did you not have authority? Did you not have budget? What happened? Let's evaluate that before we move on. Now you're going to throw back to the other person. You're going to empower them. Get them to throw the ideas out of what they think the next step should be. So, what would you do differently next time? Or how do you think we can move forward from here are great questions to start the empower phase. One of the important things to think about with feedback is who you're giving that feedback to. As a manager, you're always wanting to flex to your employee. That's how you develop and grow them. That's what empowerment is. So, if they're somebody that really likes direct feedback, even if it's something you're not comfortable with, they will respect and be able to take it in better if you can just get to the point. If you're somebody who's really direct and they need a little bit more tact and diplomacy then you're going to need to massage your messaging so, again, it can be heard. It is important to know that there's a correlation between the speed at which somebody receives that feedback and the importance that they place on it. When you delay feedback, you delay the value you're placing on it. So, immediacy is important. As we empower them and bring those ideas, you have to be very careful at that last stage of the conversation where you're collaborating. As a leader, when you put your idea out there, they're just going to defer. So, build off their ideas. Another key thing that can happen in that last phase of the feedback, especially when things might not have gone the way that you wanted, is to leverage the Law of Similarity. By sharing experience that you went through that might be similar to what they're experiencing, you create a teachable moment. You build trust. When you're vulnerable with your employees, you increase your credibility. Share the story of how when things didn't go so well for you. What you did, what you learned, how it went, and let them know it's okay. We all make mistakes and we can still get to the positions that you're in. And the last thing to remember is the Law of Likability called Mood Memory. Mood Memory is that people remember more how you make them feel, than anything that you said. So, ensure that you are being action oriented. Feedback is not about berating somebody or punishing. We focus on the past to plan for the future.
Sheila Heen on the science of receiving feedback
Step one is understanding your own reactions when you get feedback. There are three triggers that cause us to react to feedback badly. The first is truth triggers. We ask ourselves, is this advice good or bad? Is this true or not true? Should I pay attention to it or can I easily find what's wrong with it and set it aside? The second trigger's relationship triggers because all feedback comes in the context of the relationship between giver and receiver. And while you would think that the advice is either good or bad, who's giving it and our reactions to who's giving it, quickly overtake and taint our reaction to what it is that they're saying. I will either pre-dismiss your feedback because of the troubled relationship, or I sometimes have givers whose feedback come pre-approved whether it's actually good advice or not. The third trigger is what we call identity triggers. People are wired very differently, and in terms of their sensitivity to feedback, individuals can vary by up to 3,000%, which is why two people on your team, when you get feedback from the customer, may react very differently. So, understanding your own feedback footprint and the ways in which my feedback profile may be different from yours can also help us understand why, between giver and receiver, we're reacting so differently.
Valerie Purdie Greenaway: Rethink performance evaluations
Performance evaluations are something that are happening more and more in companies while the science is telling us that there's more and more bias in performance evaluation. One of the biases is when you are observing a person's performance, so if I am observing a female executive, I'm going to remember when they're doing things that are consistent with gender stereotypes. If they're having a bad day at work or something happened and you just happen to see them tearing up, you're going to remember that and say this woman's emotional. What you're not going to remember are all the hours that she was there at 7:00 PM or 8:00 PM or 5:00 AM or working on Saturdays and Sundays. So, the first step is we need to retrain the brain to pick up on the whole range of what people are doing. That doesn't happen at the performance stage, that happens all throughout the year. The second thing is doing the actual performance evaluations. One of the findings in psychology is that people are making the wrong kinds of comparisons. For example, you take again a woman in the workplace, you're saying this woman is actually doing really well given that she's a woman in finance. The problem is that when you move up and up in a company and you're at a high level executive, there's only one woman, and there's like 10 other men, there's no other comparison, so now you're saying, this woman is okay for a man but would be really awesome relative to a woman. So, performance evaluations, particularly for underrepresented groups, get worse the higher they go up because they have solo status. 360's are extremely popular where each person in the workplace is evaluating each other person, but if there is bias in the workplace, if there's a very strong stereotype about e.g. women in investment banking, then each person is going to still pick up on the same cues. There's all of these dynamics that happen at the point of how you observe people and at the performance evaluations.
Tim Harford on creating a culture of dissent
I think if you have a culture where dissent is difficult, where disagreement is difficult, you've got a big problem. Because any organization is going to make mistakes. And those mistakes need to be fixed as quickly as possible. One way or another, you're going to have to find a way where mistakes are revealed, exposed, and then corrected. Rather than spending all this time to say, "Hey, I really love what you're doing." "It's really great work, blah, blah, blah." Before you finally get to the criticism, which people have long since ignored because you said, you're wrapping it in all this fluff. Instead, you get straight to the criticism, you just say, "Well, that's great, "and wouldn't it be even better if we did X?" , in a very positive way, but very honest and direct. You need that dissent, that disagreement, that criticism, but you have to find a way of making it, wrapping it in a way that it will be accepted and listened to. To be specific, targeted, focused, but also positive.
Coaching and developing employees
Become a great coach and leader
According to Gallup, only 15% of employees are truly engaged in their work. The other 85% are actively disengaged and looking for the exit sign. This shows that leaders and managers aren't quite sure how to navigate the terrain of employee development, and employees aren't clear about growth opportunities available to them. In the either direction, the path is not clear.
Overview of Workplace Coaching
Busting myths and finding time
Coaching is guiding, questioning, prompting, and encouraging forward movement. It's inspiring people to take ownership of their work and their careers. The coaching tools and practices you'll be exploring in this course are designed to help you become more collaborative, less directive, and more efficient. You'll be giving people more autonomy and doing less handholding, which will save time in the long run, and increase engagement and results. By growing your talent you're constantly creating value for yourself, for your people, and your company. Now, your employees are responsible for driving their careers, but we all need champions and collaborators, people who work with us to unlock our strengths and purposefulness and help us make use of them for everyone's benefit. Coaching is essential if you want to accelerate the growth of your high potentials and create bottom-line results all around.
Establishing a coaching relationship
Three easy steps to help you get things started no matter where they are on the engagement continuum:
Intentionally design your coaching relationship with a simple framework. While there are many coaching frameworks one of the easiest to implement is the GROW model. GROW stands for goals, realities, options, and way forward. Goals of course are the outcomes your people want to achieve. And you want to be as specific as possible so that's it very clear to both of you what it looks like when it's a done deal. Realities has to do with what's currently happening in relationship to any goal. And discovering what the challenges and roadblocks are. Now once your coachees identify challenges and roadblocks you can begin to uncover options or the possibilities available to them to make progress toward their goals. The way forward is all about choosing the next right steps. And as with any next step it's a good idea to add some accountability in the form of timing or a deadline. For goals you might ask, what would you like to achieve? Or where do you want to grow most in your role and/or career? For realities, what are the obstacles in your way of achieving your goal? For options, what are all the possibilities we can brainstorm for tackling this goal? And finally, for way forward, what are your next steps?
Communicate your intention to make your coaching conversations an ongoing practice and agree on some basic logistics (day and time you meet, how often and location). Agreeing on logistics communicates your commitment to helping your people succeed.
Confidentiality. To build trust in coaching, your employee's process needs to be held in the vault. While you meet agree to share great results and accomplishments with your team or leadership, the content of your coaching conversations needs to be held in strict confidence.
Cornerstones of coaching
Be curious, let the employee lead and coach the whole person. These are the three cornerstones of the coaching process that will anchor all your conversations and help you work smarter. Your people can only make better choices for themselves if we as leaders get curious and then get out of the way. People often know exactly where things are going off the rails and what'll take to turn things around and that brings us to the third cornerstone. Coach the whole person. This means the life, work, work-life merge is not only relevant but crucial to engagement and satisfaction. As managers we don't always know if someone is dealing with a conflict with a co-worker, an ailing parent or a terrible commute. But whatever it is you can be sure those kinds of circumstances have an impact on their ability to perform. So, be curious, let your people lead and coach the whole person. With just a little more patience your employees will do the talking and the solutions they find on their own will often be way more effective and more durable.
Three types of coaching conversations
In the workplace, your coaching conversations with people will be very much tied to accomplishing goals, both personal and organizational. In fact, those conversations will tend to follow a very distinct arc relative to those goals, vision, implementation, and reflection. Vision conversations typically happen at the beginning of the coaching arc. What strengths do you already have that you think you can lean on to accomplish that? What do you think you need to learn? One of the most important features in vision conversations is to stay open and keep drilling down into your people's answers to make sure you're not just skimming the surface, or moving into the goal setting process too quickly. You want to spend time in this part of the arc so that the goals your people set are energizing and connected to both their personal aspirations and the needs of your company. Keep asking what else? Now, let's move onto implementation conversations. This is where you help your people translate that self-awareness envisioning into setting goals and accountabilities. Now, let's focus on reflection conversations. Reflection is all about creating a pause in the action to anchor learning, growth, and results. You're assessing, acknowledging, and maybe even celebrating. While we've shown each one as a distinct conversation, you'll no doubt find yourself dipping from vision, to implementation, and back again until your coachees reach their goal. The payoff for you is conserving your energy and time, and the payoff for your people is autonomy and mastery.
Building your Coaching Skills
Asking powerful questions
Powerful questions are provocative questions, they're open ended and typically begin with who, what, when, where, why and how, and they're the bread and butter in your coaching tool box. Powerful questions invite your people to find clarity, self-awareness, options for action and new perspectives, and they act as little triggers to help your people come up with their own ideas and solutions. A few questions for starting a cogent conversation. You might ask, what are your wins and challenges since we last spoke? Or, what would you like to focus on today? Next here are few questions to get at the substance of an issue or a challenge. What seems to be the main obstacle? Or, what's stopping you? What do you want? The next set of questions are helpful for sourcing new perspectives. If the same thing came up again, what do you think you'd do? Or, if we could wipe the slate clean, what would you do? What are possible solutions? And finally, here are a few questions for planning an action. How could you improve the situation? What's your game plan? What are your next steps? By what day or time will you complete these steps? When you feel you're about to give advice or offer criticism, pause, then start your sentence with what, or how, and improvise your way through the question.
Becoming an active listener
In our everyday conversations, we're so full of preconceived ideas about what people are saying and what we think people mean and where we think the conversation is headed. We're listening for what we want to hear and filtering things through our opinions and biases and we're waiting for a space to interject our perspective. Coaching requires a whole different kind of listening. Instead of listening followed by direction giving, you want to listen to find the next right question. You want your people to be able to source themselves for answers. So, here are five strategies to improve your listening. First, be present and focus on the other person. When you're sitting down face to face you're objective is to clear your mind, set aside your own to do list, and make yourself present and available. Next, minimize distraction by closing your door and turning off ringers and alerts. Take a moment to unplug and focus. And three, give cues that you're listening. Now we do this verbally by saying things like uh huh, um hmm, and yes and through body language by nodding and smiling occasionally. Fourth, mirror what you hear. Again, our assumptions and judgements can cloud what we think we hear so your role is to understand what's really being said. Finally, turn directive statements into powerful, open-ended questions. When you feel you're about to give advice, direction, or offer criticism, pause. Then start your sentence with what or how and improvise your way through the question. Listening and question-asking go hand in hand. So when you find yourself cutting to the chase and problem solving for your employee, say to yourself, WAIT. And that stands for Why Am I Talking? That way you can redirect yourself. Ask an open-ended question and turn things back over to your people.
Challenging your employees for growth
You could say that all of coaching is about challenge, helping people stretch beyond current capacity. But challenge is personal, and what may be challenging in a good way for one person, might be challenging in a bad way for another. There are three key aspects to challenges. One, it has to take people to or past their current comfort zone. Two, it has to include some brainstorming to find an authentic, relevant challenge. And three, it has to be accepted for it to be a true challenge. Make sure your employee's acceptance of the challenge is genuine.
Taking the next steps and building momentum
The first three coaching practices, asking questions, listening, and challenging will almost always point you in the direction of next steps. But if your employee's a little foggy about a solution and not sure what action to take, brainstorming can help them uncover multiple solutions and possibilities for action. But before they can unlock their creativity and brainstorm effectively, they have to be able to outgas about what's frustrating them or what their fears are about a project or a task. So, you can do a little pre-brainstorming by asking three questions. One, what are you frustrated about? Two, what do you want? And three, what are your aspirations. If your employee is stuck, ask them to make a list of frustrations, wants, and aspirations to get things moving. Now while there are many different brainstorming models, or a decision matrix or mind mapping, simplify things and focus on two kinds of powerful questions you can use to help people get unstuck. The first set of questions I call generators and are intended to unleash as many ideas as possible: What have you tried already? What part of the problem have you not explored? What needs to be happening that isn't happening now? What would it look like if everything was exactly as you envision? What's another option and what else? The next set of questions are called deciders and they help people find right actions: What's the smallest or easiest step you could take right now? What action could you take that would light a fire under this project? And what action would give you the biggest leap in learning? And finally, what one action would trigger all the rest?
You need to hold up your end of the bargain and walk the talk to keep trust and commitment high. What your employees choose as a next right action might involve gaining access to people or resources or even training, things you'll likely have a hand in orchestrating or at least approving.
Managing accountability
Coaching would not be coaching without accountability. Accountability involves three elements; what action is your employee agreeing to, when will they do it, and how will you know they accomplished it? In between making an agreement, taking action by a defined timeline and communicating the results of those actions, lay all kinds of learning opportunities. Now this is where your employee takes the what and turns it into the how. Obviously, some actions and agreements are simple or transactional, like scheduling a meeting and reporting back about the results. Others may involve more complex details like organizing a workshop or a training. With long tall agreements like that you'll want to guide your people to establish accountability milestones and encourage them to define how and when they'll communicate their progress. A point to remember here, failure is a part of the process. Missed deadlines, botched actions, procrastination, forgetfulness, they're all part of the territory. It's another opportunity for growth. Inspiring action and getting to accountability means holding people to their big picture goals and outcomes and helping them find their way back when things get a little bit messy.
Giving future-focused feedback
So often performance feedback tends to focus on what went wrong and how things should have been done. In other words, it's focused on the past. And people experience constructive criticism as shaming. When people feel shamed and judged, it not only slows momentum, it feeds disengagement too. But future focus feedback sidesteps this personal critique in favor of teasing out what's possible, and what might be improved in the future. Here's what future focused feedback might sound like. "Okay, that's disappointing for both you and me." "What happened?" Asking what happened gives you an opportunity to gather information while also allowing your employee to tell their story and vent a little. Then you say "Let's put our heads together and brainstorm and see how we can turn things around." Once you've explored possibilities and identified some solutions, you're in action again. Now you need to schedule time for reflection and ask a couple of more questions. "What can we do in the future to make sure we don't find ourselves here again?" Or "Let's really dig in and explore lessons learned from the whole experience." Learning to give future focused feedback may take a little practice. Once you've learned what the problem is, take a few minutes to cool down and gather your thoughts. We can't change the past but we can influence the future. And this future focused feedback is more efficient because it keeps the trust level high in your relationship, maintains momentum, and keeps people focused on the goals and results your all working toward. It's the kind of feedback that comes from leadership and inspires leadership.
Using Tools Assessments and Questionnaires
The discovery questionnaire
The Discovery Questionnaire is a self-assessment that will deepen your coaching toolbox and will  help you create a foundation for working with your employees. Now for some people, completing the questionnaire may be the first time they've ever thought deeply about the bigger questions in their work and life. And for you, the answers they provide may reveal new or unexpected strengths that can be tapped in the future. The questionnaire first focuses on assessing your employee's current role, with questions like, what do you love about your work, and what do you wish you could change? Next, the questionnaire captures achievements and goals, by asking questions like, what do you want to accomplish this year, or, where you do see yourself in the next five years? The next area of the assessment deals with identifying work styles, with questions like, how well do you keep your promises to yourself and others, or, how satisfied are you with your level of productivity? And finally, vision questions like, if you were the CEO, where would you take this company, or, if you could change the world, what problems would you solve? The information you gather can be referred to throughout your coaching relationship.
Discovery Questionnaire can be found in exercise files.
Team sourcing and influence interviews
There is an exercise called the influence interview. It involves seeking out people who really know you, like your family, friends, and colleagues, and the goal is to find out how they perceive you. What you do well and what you need to work on. The influence interview isn't for everyone, it takes some personal fortitude. Here's how it works. Your coachees will make a list of people to interview by email, in that email the last two sets of questions focusing on strengths and reality checks. The strengths questions are like this: what are my greatest strengths? What skills can I be counted on to bring to the table? And what strengths and skills have been most helpful to you. Now here are the reality check questions. Where do you see me struggle? How do I get in my own way? What can I do right now to improve? And what would you do if you were me? Keep things simple and straight forward. Your employee needs to reassure the people they interview that they won't be rebutting or defending, they're simply taking it all in and saying thank you. Influence interviews can be scary, but they can also be transformational in terms of your employees understanding of themselves and their impact on others.
Maintaining the Coaching Cycle
Designing stretch opportunities
How stretch opportunities might look like in your organization? The first kind of stretch opportunity is learning and education. When you first start coaching your employees, be sure to ask what their educational goals are and see if you can find ways to meet them. Informal opportunities include workshops, conferences, certification courses, and online resources like webinars and e-learning. And then there's formal education. In some companies, getting an undergrad or even advanced degree like an MBA might be an employee benefit. Identify early what your people want to learn and ask them to investigate what internal and external resources are available. Make sure your employees create a timeline for accomplishing their learning goals and do everything you can to protect that timeline from getting swallowed up by emergencies. The second stretch opportunity is mentoring. It is about providing guidance and direction to a mentee, usually a junior level employee with similar interests. They may even aspire to the position of the mentor. The mentor typically has achieved a level of success and voluntarily shares his or her expertise. So, think about your coachee, her goals and aspirations, where she wants to learn and grow. As a manager coach, your role would be to facilitate connections between your coachee and leaders inside and outside your organization. And the third stretch opportunity I want to talk about is sponsorship. Let's say you have a high performer who's craving new opportunities and wanting to be more visible and useful. Sponsorship is about actively advocating for your people and putting your reputation behind them, making introductions, and opening doors to help them advance in their careers. And finally, here's a stretch opportunity for you. A great way to lock in what you've learned is to teach others.
Working through blind spots and resistance
Employee development coaching is all about change. Change is hard for most people. So, you can count on encountering some kind of resistance or push back during the process. In fact, not everyone will want to be coached and not everyone is coachable. It would be a mistake to make coaching mandatory for all your employees. Instead start with the people who are ready and allow the benefits to move through the team naturally. When your employee completes the self-assessment tools, use the information you gather to task for coachability. If you get one-word answers or a bunch of I don't knows, this a cue to challenge or stretch them. Even with coachable people the first objection you're likely hear to hear is why, what am I doing wrong? For high achievers, assure them that coaching isn't remedial and what you're up to is accelerating their growth and advancement. For those who may be under performing, tell them you want to make sure you're tapping their strengths and finding ways to help them be successful. Now as you begin coaching your people, you will no doubt have to deal with people showing up late, forgetting meetings, missing deadlines or just not participating full out. So here are some rules of thumb for dealing with all of it. One, don't take it personally. Instead be curious and try to focus on the problem and not the people. Two, ask open-ended questions to each issue or objection. If you feel a criticism about to leave your lips, pause and turn it into an open-ended question. Now three, give people time to vent without interruption or feedback. Sometimes people get swept up in the moment or a conflict erupts and they just need to let off steam. The worst thing we can do as coaches is to take sides or agree with our people's limiting beliefs. Instead just listen and then try to move things forward. One final piece of resistance I want to deal with is disengagement. Your employee shows up, sits back, doesn't offer much in the way of conversation, they avoid eye contact or give one-word answers. They sit with folded arms or they use dismissive physical gestures. When people are engaged and interested they tend to lean forward and nod their heads and grapple with things with their hands. So, one thing you can do is play back the physical posture or movement and ask your employee what folded arms mean? And this will often crack things open so you can get to the root of their resistance. With a little persistence and empathy, you'll learn to push through resistance rather than let it derail you. So, hang in there, remind people of their big picture vision and keep things moving.
Conclusion - Next steps
Coaching is about generating growth, results and opportunity. It also creates an environment where positive behavioural changes lead to improvement in team and organizational results. And good coaching is about creating a high-performance culture not managing a low performance one. Coaching is a management skill that requires devoted energy to improve.